An object recognition system finds objects in the real world from an image of the world, 
using object models which are known a priori.
This task is surprisingly difficult. 
Humans perform object recognition effortlessly and instantaneously.
Algorithmic description of this task for implementation on machines has been very difficult. 
In this chapter we will discuss different steps in object recognition and introduce some techniques that have been used for object recognition in many applications. 
We will discuss the different types of recognition tasks that a vision system may need to perform. 
We will analyze the complexity of these tasks and present approaches useful in different phases of the recognition task.
The object recognition problem can be defined as a labeling problem based on models of known objects. 
Formally, given an image containing one or more objects of interest (and background) and a set of labels corresponding to a set of models known to the system, 
the system should assign correct labels to regions, or a set of regions, in the image. 
The object recognition problem is closely tied to the segmentation problem: 
without at least a partial recognition of objects, segmentation cannot be done, and without segmentation, object recognition is not possible.
In this chapter, we discuss basic aspects of object recognition. 
We present the architecture and main components of object recognition and discuss their role in object recognition systems of varying complexity. 
Mrs. Dalloway said she would buy the flowers herself.
For Lucy had her work cut out for her. The doors would be taken off
their hinges; Rumpelmayer's men were coming. And then, thought
Clarissa Dalloway, what a morning—fresh as if issued to children on a beach.
What a lark! What a plunge! For so it had always seemed to her, when,
with a little squeak of the hinges, which she could hear now, she had
burst open the French windows and plunged at Bourton into the open
air. How fresh, how calm, stiller than this of course, the air was in the
early morning; like the flap of a wave; the kiss of a wave; chill and sharp
and yet (for a girl of eighteen as she then was) solemn, feeling as she did,
standing there at the open window, that something awful was about to
happen; looking at the flowers, at the trees with the smoke winding off
them and the rooks rising, falling; standing and looking until Peter
Walsh said, "Musing among the vegetables?"—was that it?—"I prefer
men to cauliflowers"—was that it? He must have said it at breakfast one
morning when she had gone out on to the terrace—Peter Walsh. He
would be back from India one of these days, June or July, she forgot
which, for his letters were awfully dull; it was his sayings one re-
membered; his eyes, his pocket-knife, his smile, his grumpiness and,
when millions of things had utterly vanished—how strange it was!—a
few sayings like this about cabbages.
She stiffened a little on the kerb, waiting for Durtnall's van to pass. A
charming woman, Scrope Purvis thought her (knowing her as one does
know people who live next door to one in Westminster); a touch of the
bird about her, of the jay, blue-green, light, vivacious, though she was
over fifty, and grown very white since her illness. There she perched,
never seeing him, waiting to cross, very upright.
For having lived in Westminster—how many years now? over
twenty,—one feels even in the midst of the traffic, or waking at night,
Clarissa was positive, a particular hush, or solemnity; an indescribable
pause; a suspense (but that might be her heart, affected, they said, by in-
fluenza) before Big Ben strikes. There! Out it boomed. First a warning,
musical; then the hour, irrevocable. The leaden circles dissolved in the
air. Such fools we are, she thought, crossing Victoria Street. For Heaven
only knows why one loves it so, how one sees it so, making it up, build-
ing it round one, tumbling it, creating it every moment afresh; but the
veriest frumps, the most dejected of miseries sitting on doorsteps (drink
their downfall) do the same; can't be dealt with, she felt positive, by Acts
of Parliament for that very reason: they love life. In people's eyes, in the
swing, tramp, and trudge; in the bellow and the uproar; the carriages,
motor cars, omnibuses, vans, sandwich men shuffling and swinging;
brass bands; barrel organs; in the triumph and the jingle and the strange
high singing of some aeroplane overhead was what she loved; life; Lon-
don; this moment of June.
For it was the middle of June. The War was over, except for some one
like Mrs. Foxcroft at the Embassy last night eating her heart out because
that nice boy was killed and now the old Manor House must go to a
cousin; or Lady Bexborough who opened a bazaar, they said, with the
telegram in her hand, John, her favourite, killed; but it was over; thank
Heaven—over. It was June. The King and Queen were at the Palace. And
everywhere, though it was still so early, there was a beating, a stirring of
galloping ponies, tapping of cricket bats; Lords, Ascot, Ranelagh and all
the rest of it; wrapped in the soft mesh of the grey-blue morning air,
which, as the day wore on, would unwind them, and set down on their
lawns and pitches the bouncing ponies, whose forefeet just struck the
ground and up they sprung, the whirling young men, and laughing girls
in their transparent muslins who, even now, after dancing all night, were
taking their absurd woolly dogs for a run; and even now, at this hour,
discreet old dowagers were shooting out in their motor cars on errands
of mystery; and the shopkeepers were fidgeting in their windows with
their paste and diamonds, their lovely old sea-green brooches in
eighteenth-century settings to tempt Americans (but one must econom-
ise, not buy things rashly for Elizabeth), and she, too, loving it as she did
with an absurd and faithful passion, being part of it, since her people
were courtiers once in the time of the Georges, she, too, was going that
very night to kindle and illuminate; to give her party. But how strange,
on entering the Park, the silence; the mist; the hum; the slow-swimming
happy ducks; the pouched birds waddling; and who should be coming
along with his back against the Government buildings, most appropri-
ately, carrying a despatch box stamped with the Royal Arms, who but
Hugh Whitbread; her old friend Hugh—the admirable Hugh!
"Good-morning to you, Clarissa!" said Hugh, rather extravagantly, for
they had known each other as children. "Where are you off to?"
"I love walking in London," said Mrs. Dalloway. "Really it's better than
walking in the country."
They had just come up—unfortunately—to see doctors. Other people
came to see pictures; go to the opera; take their daughters out; the Whit-
breads came "to see doctors." Times without number Clarissa had visited
Evelyn Whitbread in a nursing home. Was Evelyn ill again? Evelyn was
a good deal out of sorts, said Hugh, intimating by a kind of pout or swell
of his very well-covered, manly, extremely handsome, perfectly up-
holstered body (he was almost too well dressed always, but presumably
had to be, with his little job at Court) that his wife had some internal ail-
ment, nothing serious, which, as an old friend, Clarissa Dalloway would
quite understand without requiring him to specify. Ah yes, she did of
course; what a nuisance; and felt very sisterly and oddly conscious at the
same time of her hat. Not the right hat for the early morning, was that it?
For Hugh always made her feel, as he bustled on, raising his hat rather
extravagantly and assuring her that she might be a girl of eighteen, and
of course he was coming to her party to-night, Evelyn absolutely in-
sisted, only a little late he might be after the party at the Palace to which
he had to take one of Jim's boys,—she always felt a little skimpy beside
Hugh; schoolgirlish; but attached to him, partly from having known him
always, but she did think him a good sort in his own way, though
Richard was nearly driven mad by him, and as for Peter Walsh, he had
never to this day forgiven her for liking him.
She could remember scene after scene at Bourton—Peter furious;
Hugh not, of course, his match in any way, but still not a positive imbe-
cile as Peter made out; not a mere barber's block. When his old mother
wanted him to give up shooting or to take her to Bath he did it, without a
word; he was really unselfish, and as for saying, as Peter did, that he had
no heart, no brain, nothing but the manners and breeding of an English
gentleman, that was only her dear Peter at his worst; and he could be in-
tolerable; he could be impossible; but adorable to walk with on a morn-
ing like this.
(June had drawn out every leaf on the trees. The mothers of Pimlico
gave suck to their young. Messages were passing from the Fleet to the
Admiralty. Arlington Street and Piccadilly seemed to chafe the very air
in the Park and lift its leaves hotly, brilliantly, on waves of that divine vi-
tality which Clarissa loved. To dance, to ride, she had adored all that.)
For they might be parted for hundreds of years, she and Peter; she
never wrote a letter and his were dry sticks; but suddenly it would come
over her, If he were with me now what would he say?—some days, some
sights bringing him back to her calmly, without the old bitterness; which
perhaps was the reward of having cared for people; they came back in
the middle of St. James's Park on a fine morning—indeed they did. But
Peter—however beautiful the day might be, and the trees and the grass,
and the little girl in pink—Peter never saw a thing of all that. He would
put on his spectacles, if she told him to; he would look. It was the state of
the world that interested him; Wagner, Pope's poetry, people's characters
eternally, and the defects of her own soul. How he scolded her! How
they argued! She would marry a Prime Minister and stand at the top of a
staircase; the perfect hostess he called her (she had cried over it in her
bedroom), she had the makings of the perfect hostess, he said.
So she would still find herself arguing in St. James's Park, still making
out that she had been right—and she had too—not to marry him. For in
marriage a little licence, a little independence there must be between
people living together day in day out in the same house; which Richard
gave her, and she him. (Where was he this morning for instance? Some
committee, she never asked what.) But with Peter everything had to be
shared; everything gone into. And it was intolerable, and when it came
to that scene in the little garden by the fountain, she had to break with
him or they would have been destroyed, both of them ruined, she was
convinced; though she had borne about with her for years like an arrow
sticking in her heart the grief, the anguish; and then the horror of the mo-
ment when some one told her at a concert that he had married a woman
met on the boat going to India! Never should she forget all that! Cold,
heartless, a prude, he called her. Never could she understand how he
cared. But those Indian women did presumably—silly, pretty, flimsy
nincompoops. And she wasted her pity. For he was quite happy, he as-
sured her—perfectly happy, though he had never done a thing that they
talked of; his whole life had been a failure. It made her angry still.
She had reached the Park gates. She stood for a moment, looking at the
omnibuses in Piccadilly.
She would not say of any one in the world now that they were this or
were that. She felt very young; at the same time unspeakably aged. She
sliced like a knife through everything; at the same time was outside,
looking on. She had a perpetual sense, as she watched the taxi cabs, of
being out, out, far out to sea and alone; she always had the feeling that it
was very, very dangerous to live even one day. Not that she thought her-
self clever, or much out of the ordinary. How she had got through life on
the few twigs of knowledge Fräulein Daniels gave them she could not
think. She knew nothing; no language, no history; she scarcely read a
book now, except memoirs in bed; and yet to her it was absolutely ab-
sorbing; all this; the cabs passing; and she would not say of Peter, she
would not say of herself, I am this, I am that.
Her only gift was knowing people almost by instinct, she thought,
walking on. If you put her in a room with some one, up went her back
like a cat's; or she purred. Devonshire House, Bath House, the house
with the china cockatoo, she had seen them all lit up once; and re-
membered Sylvia, Fred, Sally Seton—such hosts of people; and dancing
all night; and the waggons plodding past to market; and driving home
across the Park. She remembered once throwing a shilling into the Ser-
pentine. But every one remembered; what she loved was this, here, now,
in front of her; the fat lady in the cab. Did it matter then, she asked her-
self, walking towards Bond Street, did it matter that she must inevitably
cease completely; all this must go on without her; did she resent it; or did
it not become consoling to believe that death ended absolutely? but that
somehow in the streets of London, on the ebb and flow of things, here,
there, she survived, Peter survived, lived in each other, she being part,
she was positive, of the trees at home; of the house there, ugly, rambling
all to bits and pieces as it was; part of people she had never met; being
laid out like a mist between the people she knew best, who lifted her on
their branches as she had seen the trees lift the mist, but it spread ever so
far, her life, herself. But what was she dreaming as she looked into
Hatchards' shop window? What was she trying to recover? What image
of white dawn in the country, as she read in the book spread open:
Fear no more the heat o' the sun
Nor the furious winter's rages.
This late age of the world's experience had bred in them all, all men
and women, a well of tears. Tears and sorrows; courage and endurance;
a perfectly upright and stoical bearing. Think, for example, of the woman
she admired most, Lady Bexborough, opening the bazaar.
There were Jorrocks' Jaunts and Jollities; there were Soapy Sponge and
Mrs. Asquith's Memoirs and Big Game Shooting in Nigeria, all spread open.
Ever so many books there were; but none that seemed exactly right to
take to Evelyn Whitbread in her nursing home. Nothing that would
serve to amuse her and make that indescribably dried-up little woman
look, as Clarissa came in, just for a moment cordial; before they settled
down for the usual interminable talk of women's ailments. How much
she wanted it—that people should look pleased as she came in, Clarissa
thought and turned and walked back towards Bond Street, annoyed, be-
cause it was silly to have other reasons for doing things. Much rather
would she have been one of those people like Richard who did things for
themselves, whereas, she thought, waiting to cross, half the time she did
things not simply, not for themselves; but to make people think this or
that; perfect idiocy she knew (and now the policeman held up his hand)
for no one was ever for a second taken in. Oh if she could have had her
life over again! she thought, stepping on to the pavement, could have
looked even differently!
She would have been, in the first place, dark like Lady Bexborough,
with a skin of crumpled leather and beautiful eyes. She would have
been, like Lady Bexborough, slow and stately; rather large; interested in
politics like a man; with a country house; very dignified, very sincere. In-
stead of which she had a narrow pea-stick figure; a ridiculous little face,
beaked like a bird's. That she held herself well was true; and had nice
hands and feet; and dressed well, considering that she spent little. But of-
ten now this body she wore (she stopped to look at a Dutch picture), this
body, with all its capacities, seemed nothing—nothing at all. She had the
oddest sense of being herself invisible; unseen; unknown; there being no
more marrying, no more having of children now, but only this astonish-
ing and rather solemn progress with the rest of them, up Bond Street,
this being Mrs. Dalloway; not even Clarissa any more; this being Mrs.
Richard Dalloway.
Bond Street fascinated her; Bond Street early in the morning in the sea-
son; its flags flying; its shops; no splash; no glitter; one roll of tweed in
the shop where her father had bought his suits for fifty years; a few
pearls; salmon on an iceblock.
"That is all," she said, looking at the fishmonger's. "That is all," she re-
peated, pausing for a moment at the window of a glove shop where, be-
fore the War, you could buy almost perfect gloves. And her old Uncle
William used to say a lady is known by her shoes and her gloves. He had
turned on his bed one morning in the middle of the War. He had said, "I
have had enough." Gloves and shoes; she had a passion for gloves; but
her own daughter, her Elizabeth, cared not a straw for either of them.
Not a straw, she thought, going on up Bond Street to a shop where
they kept flowers for her when she gave a party. Elizabeth really cared
for her dog most of all. The whole house this morning smelt of tar. Still,
better poor Grizzle than Miss Kilman; better distemper and tar and all
the rest of it than sitting mewed in a stuffy bedroom with a prayer book!
Better anything, she was inclined to say. But it might be only a phase, as
Richard said, such as all girls go through. It might be falling in love. But
why with Miss Kilman? who had been badly treated of course; one must
make allowances for that, and Richard said she was very able, had a
really historical mind. Anyhow they were inseparable, and Elizabeth, her
own daughter, went to Communion; and how she dressed, how she
treated people who came to lunch she did not care a bit, it being her
experience that the religious ecstasy made people callous (so did causes);
dulled their feelings, for Miss Kilman would do anything for the Russi-
ans, starved herself for the Austrians, but in private inflicted positive tor-
ture, so insensitive was she, dressed in a green mackintosh coat. Year in
year out she wore that coat; she perspired; she was never in the room
five minutes without making you feel her superiority, your inferiority;
how poor she was; how rich you were; how she lived in a slum without a
cushion or a bed or a rug or whatever it might be, all her soul rusted
with that grievance sticking in it, her dismissal from school during the
War—poor embittered unfortunate creature! For it was not her one hated
but the idea of her, which undoubtedly had gathered in to itself a great
deal that was not Miss Kilman; had become one of those spectres with
which one battles in the night; one of those spectres who stand astride us
and suck up half our life-blood, dominators and tyrants; for no doubt
with another throw of the dice, had the black been uppermost and not
the white, she would have loved Miss Kilman! But not in this world. No.
It rasped her, though, to have stirring about in her this brutal monster!
to hear twigs cracking and feel hooves planted down in the depths of
that leaf-encumbered forest, the soul; never to be content quite, or quite
secure, for at any moment the brute would be stirring, this hatred,
which, especially since her illness, had power to make her feel scraped,
hurt in her spine; gave her physical pain, and made all pleasure in
beauty, in friendship, in being well, in being loved and making her home
delightful rock, quiver, and bend as if indeed there were a monster grub-
bing at the roots, as if the whole panoply of content were nothing but self
love! this hatred!
Nonsense, nonsense! she cried to herself, pushing through the swing
doors of Mulberry's the florists.
She advanced, light, tall, very upright, to be greeted at once by button-
faced Miss Pym, whose hands were always bright red, as if they had
been stood in cold water with the flowers.
There were flowers: delphiniums, sweet peas, bunches of lilac; and
carnations, masses of carnations. There were roses; there were irises. Ah
yes—so she breathed in the earthy garden sweet smell as she stood talk-
ing to Miss Pym who owed her help, and thought her kind, for kind she
had been years ago; very kind, but she looked older, this year, turning
her head from side to side among the irises and roses and nodding tufts
of lilac with her eyes half closed, snuffing in, after the street uproar, the
delicious scent, the exquisite coolness. And then, opening her eyes, how
fresh like frilled linen clean from a laundry laid in wicker trays the roses
9
looked; and dark and prim the red carnations, holding their heads up;
and all the sweet peas spreading in their bowls, tinged violet, snow
white, pale—as if it were the evening and girls in muslin frocks came out
to pick sweet peas and roses after the superb summer's day, with its
almost blue-black sky, its delphiniums, its carnations, its arum lilies was
over; and it was the moment between six and seven when every
flower—roses, carnations, irises, lilac—glows; white, violet, red, deep or-
ange; every flower seems to burn by itself, softly, purely in the misty
beds; and how she loved the grey-white moths spinning in and out, over
the cherry pie, over the evening primroses!
And as she began to go with Miss Pym from jar to jar, choosing, non-
sense, nonsense, she said to herself, more and more gently, as if this
beauty, this scent, this colour, and Miss Pym liking her, trusting her,
were a wave which she let flow over her and surmount that hatred, that
monster, surmount it all; and it lifted her up and up when—oh! a pistol
shot in the street outside!
"Dear, those motor cars," said Miss Pym, going to the window to look,
and coming back and smiling apologetically with her hands full of sweet
peas, as if those motor cars, those tyres of motor cars, were all her fault.
The violent explosion which made Mrs. Dalloway jump and Miss Pym
go to the window and apologise came from a motor car which had
drawn to the side of the pavement precisely opposite Mulberry's shop
window. Passers-by who, of course, stopped and stared, had just time to
see a face of the very greatest importance against the dove-grey uphol-
stery, before a male hand drew the blind and there was nothing to be
seen except a square of dove grey.
Yet rumours were at once in circulation from the middle of Bond
Street to Oxford Street on one side, to Atkinson's scent shop on the other,
passing invisibly, inaudibly, like a cloud, swift, veil-like upon hills, fall-
ing indeed with something of a cloud's sudden sobriety and stillness
upon faces which a second before had been utterly disorderly. But now
mystery had brushed them with her wing; they had heard the voice of
authority; the spirit of religion was abroad with her eyes bandaged tight
and her lips gaping wide. But nobody knew whose face had been seen.
Was it the Prince of Wales's, the Queen's, the Prime Minister's? Whose
face was it? Nobody knew.
Edgar J. Watkiss, with his roll of lead piping round his arm, said aud-
ibly, humorously of course: "The Proime Minister's kyar."
10
Septimus Warren Smith, who found himself unable to pass, heard
him.
Septimus Warren Smith, aged about thirty, pale-faced, beak-nosed,
wearing brown shoes and a shabby overcoat, with hazel eyes which had
that look of apprehension in them which makes complete strangers ap-
prehensive too. The world has raised its whip; where will it descend?
Everything had come to a standstill. The throb of the motor engines
sounded like a pulse irregularly drumming through an entire body. The
sun became extraordinarily hot because the motor car had stopped out-
side Mulberry's shop window; old ladies on the tops of omnibuses
spread their black parasols; here a green, here a red parasol opened with
a little pop. Mrs. Dalloway, coming to the window with her arms full of
sweet peas, looked out with her little pink face pursed in enquiry. Every
one looked at the motor car. Septimus looked. Boys on bicycles sprang
off. Traffic accumulated. And there the motor car stood, with drawn
blinds, and upon them a curious pattern like a tree, Septimus thought,
and this gradual drawing together of everything to one centre before his
eyes, as if some horror had come almost to the surface and was about to
burst into flames, terrified him. The world wavered and quivered and
threatened to burst into flames. It is I who am blocking the way, he
thought. Was he not being looked at and pointed at; was he not
weighted there, rooted to the pavement, for a purpose? But for what
purpose?
"Let us go on, Septimus," said his wife, a little woman, with large eyes
in a sallow pointed face; an Italian girl.
But Lucrezia herself could not help looking at the motor car and the
tree pattern on the blinds. Was it the Queen in there—the Queen going
shopping?
The chauffeur, who had been opening something, turning something,
shutting something, got on to the box.
"Come on," said Lucrezia.
But her husband, for they had been married four, five years now,
jumped, started, and said, "All right!" angrily, as if she had interrupted
him.
People must notice; people must see. People, she thought, looking at
the crowd staring at the motor car; the English people, with their chil-
dren and their horses and their clothes, which she admired in a way; but
they were "people" now, because Septimus had said, "I will kill myself";
an awful thing to say. Suppose they had heard him? She looked at the
crowd. Help, help! she wanted to cry out to butchers' boys and women.
11
Help! Only last autumn she and Septimus had stood on the Embank-
ment wrapped in the same cloak and, Septimus reading a paper instead
of talking, she had snatched it from him and laughed in the old man's
face who saw them! But failure one conceals. She must take him away in-
to some park.
"Now we will cross," she said.
She had a right to his arm, though it was without feeling. He would
give her, who was so simple, so impulsive, only twenty-four, without
friends in England, who had left Italy for his sake, a piece of bone.
The motor car with its blinds drawn and an air of inscrutable reserve
proceeded towards Piccadilly, still gazed at, still ruffling the faces on
both sides of the street with the same dark breath of veneration whether
for Queen, Prince, or Prime Minister nobody knew. The face itself had
been seen only once by three people for a few seconds. Even the sex was
now in dispute. But there could be no doubt that greatness was seated
within; greatness was passing, hidden, down Bond Street, removed only
by a hand's-breadth from ordinary people who might now, for the first
and last time, be within speaking distance of the majesty of England, of
the enduring symbol of the state which will be known to curious anti-
quaries, sifting the ruins of time, when London is a grass-grown path
and all those hurrying along the pavement this Wednesday morning are
but bones with a few wedding rings mixed up in their dust and the gold
stoppings of innumerable decayed teeth. The face in the motor car will
then be known.
It is probably the Queen, thought Mrs. Dalloway, coming out of
Mulberry's with her flowers; the Queen. And for a second she wore a
look of extreme dignity standing by the flower shop in the sunlight while
the car passed at a foot's pace, with its blinds drawn. The Queen going to
some hospital; the Queen opening some bazaar, thought Clarissa.
The crush was terrific for the time of day. Lords, Ascot, Hurlingham,
what was it? she wondered, for the street was blocked. The British
middle classes sitting sideways on the tops of omnibuses with parcels
and umbrellas, yes, even furs on a day like this, were, she thought, more
ridiculous, more unlike anything there has ever been than one could con-
ceive; and the Queen herself held up; the Queen herself unable to pass.
Clarissa was suspended on one side of Brook Street; Sir John Buckhurst,
the old Judge on the other, with the car between them (Sir John had laid
down the law for years and liked a well-dressed woman) when the
chauffeur, leaning ever so slightly, said or showed something to the po-
liceman, who saluted and raised his arm and jerked his head and moved
12
the omnibus to the side and the car passed through. Slowly and very si-
lently it took its way.
Clarissa guessed; Clarissa knew of course; she had seen something
white, magical, circular, in the footman's hand, a disc inscribed with a
name,—the Queen's, the Prince of Wales's, the Prime Minister's?—which,
by force of its own lustre, burnt its way through (Clarissa saw the car di-
minishing, disappearing), to blaze among candelabras, glittering stars,
breasts stiff with oak leaves, Hugh Whitbread and all his colleagues, the
gentlemen of England, that night in Buckingham Palace. And Clarissa,
too, gave a party. She stiffened a little; so she would stand at the top of
her stairs.
The car had gone, but it had left a slight ripple which flowed through
glove shops and hat shops and tailors' shops on both sides of Bond
Street. For thirty seconds all heads were inclined the same way—to the
window. Choosing a pair of gloves—should they be to the elbow or
above it, lemon or pale grey?—ladies stopped; when the sentence was
finished something had happened. Something so trifling in single in-
stances that no mathematical instrument, though capable of transmitting
shocks in China, could register the vibration; yet in its fulness rather for-
midable and in its common appeal emotional; for in all the hat shops and
tailors' shops strangers looked at each other and thought of the dead; of
the flag; of Empire. In a public house in a back street a Colonial insulted
the House of Windsor which led to words, broken beer glasses, and a
general shindy, which echoed strangely across the way in the ears of
girls buying white underlinen threaded with pure white ribbon for their
weddings. For the surface agitation of the passing car as it sunk grazed
something very profound.
Gliding across Piccadilly, the car turned down St. James's Street. Tall
men, men of robust physique, well-dressed men with their tail-coats and
their white slips and their hair raked back who, for reasons difficult to
discriminate, were standing in the bow window of Brooks's with their
hands behind the tails of their coats, looking out, perceived instinctively
that greatness was passing, and the pale light of the immortal presence
fell upon them as it had fallen upon Clarissa Dalloway. At once they
stood even straighter, and removed their hands, and seemed ready to at-
tend their Sovereign, if need be, to the cannon's mouth, as their ancestors
had done before them. The white busts and the little tables in the back-
ground covered with copies of the Tatler and syphons of soda water
seemed to approve; seemed to indicate the flowing corn and the manor
houses of England; and to return the frail hum of the motor wheels as the
13
walls of a whispering gallery return a single voice expanded and made
sonorous by the might of a whole cathedral. Shawled Moll Pratt with her
flowers on the pavement wished the dear boy well (it was the Prince of
Wales for certain) and would have tossed the price of a pot of beer—a
bunch of roses—into St. James's Street out of sheer light-heartedness and
contempt of poverty had she not seen the constable's eye upon her, dis-
couraging an old Irishwoman's loyalty. The sentries at St. James's sa-
luted; Queen Alexandra's policeman approved.
A small crowd meanwhile had gathered at the gates of Buckingham
Palace. Listlessly, yet confidently, poor people all of them, they waited;
looked at the Palace itself with the flag flying; at Victoria, billowing on
her mound, admired her shelves of running water, her geraniums;
singled out from the motor cars in the Mall first this one, then that; be-
stowed emotion, vainly, upon commoners out for a drive; recalled their
tribute to keep it unspent while this car passed and that; and all the time
let rumour accumulate in their veins and thrill the nerves in their thighs
at the thought of Royalty looking at them; the Queen bowing; the Prince
saluting; at the thought of the heavenly life divinely bestowed upon
Kings; of the equerries and deep curtsies; of the Queen's old doll's house;
of Princess Mary married to an Englishman, and the Prince—ah! the
Prince! who took wonderfully, they said, after old King Edward, but was
ever so much slimmer. The Prince lived at St. James's; but he might come
along in the morning to visit his mother.
So Sarah Bletchley said with her baby in her arms, tipping her foot up
and down as though she were by her own fender in Pimlico, but keeping
her eyes on the Mall, while Emily Coates ranged over the Palace win-
dows and thought of the housemaids, the innumerable housemaids, the
bedrooms, the innumerable bedrooms. Joined by an elderly gentleman
with an Aberdeen terrier, by men without occupation, the crowd in-
creased. Little Mr. Bowley, who had rooms in the Albany and was sealed
with wax over the deeper sources of life but could be unsealed suddenly,
inappropriately, sentimentally, by this sort of thing—poor women wait-
ing to see the Queen go past—poor women, nice little children, orphans,
widows, the War—tut-tut—actually had tears in his eyes. A breeze
flaunting ever so warmly down the Mall through the thin trees, past the
bronze heroes, lifted some flag flying in the British breast of Mr. Bowley
and he raised his hat as the car turned into the Mall and held it high as
the car approached; and let the poor mothers of Pimlico press close to
him, and stood very upright. The car came on.
14
Suddenly Mrs. Coates looked up into the sky. The sound of an aero-
plane bored ominously into the ears of the crowd. There it was coming
over the trees, letting out white smoke from behind, which curled and
twisted, actually writing something! making letters in the sky! Every one
looked up.
Dropping dead down the aeroplane soared straight up, curved in a
loop, raced, sank, rose, and whatever it did, wherever it went, out
fluttered behind it a thick ruffled bar of white smoke which curled and
wreathed upon the sky in letters. But what letters? A C was it? an E, then
an L? Only for a moment did they lie still; then they moved and melted
and were rubbed out up in the sky, and the aeroplane shot further away
and again, in a fresh space of sky, began writing a K, an E, a Y perhaps?
"Glaxo," said Mrs. Coates in a strained, awe-stricken voice, gazing
straight up, and her baby, lying stiff and white in her arms, gazed
straight up.
"Kreemo," murmured Mrs. Bletchley, like a sleep-walker. With his hat
held out perfectly still in his hand, Mr. Bowley gazed straight up. All
down the Mall people were standing and looking up into the sky. As
they looked the whole world became perfectly silent, and a flight of gulls
crossed the sky, first one gull leading, then another, and in this ex-
traordinary silence and peace, in this pallor, in this purity, bells struck el-
even times, the sound fading up there among the gulls.
The aeroplane turned and raced and swooped exactly where it liked,
swiftly, freely, like a skater—
"That's an E," said Mrs. Bletchley—or a dancer—
"It's toffee," murmured Mr. Bowley—(and the car went in at the gates
and nobody looked at it), and shutting off the smoke, away and away it
rushed, and the smoke faded and assembled itself round the broad white
shapes of the clouds.
It had gone; it was behind the clouds. There was no sound. The clouds
to which the letters E, G, or L had attached themselves moved freely, as
if destined to cross from West to East on a mission of the greatest import-
ance which would never be revealed, and yet certainly so it was—a mis-
sion of the greatest importance. Then suddenly, as a train comes out of a
tunnel, the aeroplane rushed out of the clouds again, the sound boring
into the ears of all people in the Mall, in the Green Park, in Piccadilly, in
Regent Street, in Regent's Park, and the bar of smoke curved behind and
it dropped down, and it soared up and wrote one letter after anoth-
er—but what word was it writing?
15
She was getting impatient; the whole of her being was setting positively, undeniably,
domineeringly brushing aside all this unnecessary trifling (Peter Walsh
and his affairs) upon that subject which engaged her attention, and not
merely her attention, but that fibre which was the ramrod of her soul,
that essential part of her without which Millicent Bruton would not have
been Millicent Bruton; that project for emigrating young people of both
sexes born of respectable parents and setting them up with a fair pro-
spect of doing well in Canada. She exaggerated. She had perhaps lost her
sense of proportion. Emigration was not to others the obvious remedy,
the sublime conception. It was not to them (not to Hugh, or Richard, or
even to devoted Miss Brush) the liberator of the pent egotism, which a
strong martial woman, well nourished, well descended, of direct im-
pulses, downright feelings, and little introspective power (broad and
simple—why could not every one be broad and simple? she asked) feels
rise within her, once youth is past, and must eject upon some object—it
may be Emigration, it may be Emancipation; but whatever it be, this ob-
ject round which the essence of her soul is daily secreted, becomes inevit-
ably prismatic, lustrous, half looking-glass, half precious stone; now
carefully hidden in case people should sneer at it; now proudly dis-
played. Emigration had become, in short, largely Lady Bruton.
But she had to write. And one letter to the Times, she used to say to
Miss Brush, cost her more than to organise an expedition to South Africa
(which she had done in the war). After a morning's battle beginning,
tearing up, beginning again, she used to feel the futility of her own wo-
manhood as she felt it on no other occasion, and would turn gratefully to
the thought of Hugh Whitbread who possessed—no one could doubt
it—the art of writing letters to the Times.
A being so differently constituted from herself, with such a command
of language; able to put things as editors like them put; had passions
which one could not call simply greed. Lady Bruton often suspended
judgement upon men in deference to the mysterious accord in which
they, but no woman, stood to the laws of the universe; knew how to put
things; knew what was said; so that if Richard advised her, and Hugh
wrote for her, she was sure of being somehow right. So she let Hugh eat
78
his soufflé; asked after poor Evelyn; waited until they were smoking, and
then said,
"Milly, would you fetch the papers?"
And Miss Brush went out, came back; laid papers on the table; and
Hugh produced his fountain pen; his silver fountain pen, which had
done twenty years' service, he said, unscrewing the cap. It was still in
perfect order; he had shown it to the makers; there was no reason, they
said, why it should ever wear out; which was somehow to Hugh's credit,
and to the credit of the sentiments which his pen expressed (so Richard
Dalloway felt) as Hugh began carefully writing capital letters with rings
round them in the margin, and thus marvellously reduced Lady Bruton's
tangles to sense, to grammar such as the editor of the Times, Lady Bruton
felt, watching the marvellous transformation, must respect. Hugh was
slow. Hugh was pertinacious. Richard said one must take risks. Hugh
proposed modifications in deference to people's feelings, which, he said
rather tartly when Richard laughed, "had to be considered," and read out
"how, therefore, we are of opinion that the times are ripe ... the superflu-
ous youth of our ever-increasing population ... what we owe to the
dead ... " which Richard thought all stuffing and bunkum, but no harm
in it, of course, and Hugh went on drafting sentiments in alphabetical or-
der of the highest nobility, brushing the cigar ash from his waistcoat, and
summing up now and then the progress they had made until, finally, he
read out the draft of a letter which Lady Bruton felt certain was a master-
piece. Could her own meaning sound like that?
Hugh could not guarantee that the editor would put it in; but he
would be meeting somebody at luncheon.
Whereupon Lady Bruton, who seldom did a graceful thing, stuffed all
Hugh's carnations into the front of her dress, and flinging her hands out
called him "My Prime Minister!" What she would have done without
them both she did not know. They rose. And Richard Dalloway strolled
off as usual to have a look at the General's portrait, because he meant,
whenever he had a moment of leisure, to write a history of Lady Bruton's
family.
And Millicent Bruton was very proud of her family. But they could
wait, they could wait, she said, looking at the picture; meaning that her
family, of military men, administrators, admirals, had been men of ac-
tion, who had done their duty; and Richard's first duty was to his coun-
try, but it was a fine face, she said; and all the papers were ready for
Richard down at Aldmixton whenever the time came; the Labour
Government she meant. "Ah, the news from India!" she cried.
79
And then, as they stood in the hall taking yellow gloves from the bowl
on the malachite table and Hugh was offering Miss Brush with quite un-
necessary courtesy some discarded ticket or other compliment, which
she loathed from the depths of her heart and blushed brick red, Richard
turned to Lady Bruton, with his hat in his hand, and said,
"We shall see you at our party to-night?" whereupon Lady Bruton re-
sumed the magnificence which letter-writing had shattered. She might
come; or she might not come. Clarissa had wonderful energy. Parties ter-
rified Lady Bruton. But then, she was getting old. So she intimated,
standing at her doorway; handsome; very erect; while her chow
stretched behind her, and Miss Brush disappeared into the background
with her hands full of papers.
And Lady Bruton went ponderously, majestically, up to her room, lay,
one arm extended, on the sofa. She sighed, she snored, not that she was
asleep, only drowsy and heavy, drowsy and heavy, like a field of clover
in the sunshine this hot June day, with the bees going round and about
and the yellow butterflies. Always she went back to those fields down in
Devonshire, where she had jumped the brooks on Patty, her pony, with
Mortimer and Tom, her brothers. And there were the dogs; there were
the rats; there were her father and mother on the lawn under the trees,
with the tea-things out, and the beds of dahlias, the hollyhocks, the pam-
pas grass; and they, little wretches, always up to some mischief! stealing
back through the shrubbery, so as not to be seen, all bedraggled from
some roguery. What old nurse used to say about her frocks!
Ah dear, she remembered—it was Wednesday in Brook Street. Those
kind good fellows, Richard Dalloway, Hugh Whitbread, had gone this
hot day through the streets whose growl came up to her lying on the
sofa. Power was hers, position, income. She had lived in the forefront of
her time. She had had good friends; known the ablest men of her day.
Murmuring London flowed up to her, and her hand, lying on the sofa
back, curled upon some imaginary baton such as her grandfathers might
have held, holding which she seemed, drowsy and heavy, to be com-
manding battalions marching to Canada, and those good fellows walk-
ing across London, that territory of theirs, that little bit of carpet,
Mayfair.
And they went further and further from her, being attached to her by a
thin thread (since they had lunched with her) which would stretch and
stretch, get thinner and thinner as they walked across London; as if one's
friends were attached to one's body, after lunching with them, by a thin
thread, which (as she dozed there) became hazy with the sound of bells,
80
striking the hour or ringing to service, as a single spider's thread is blot-
ted with rain-drops, and, burdened, sags down. So she slept.
And Richard Dalloway and Hugh Whitbread hesitated at the corner of
Conduit Street at the very moment that Millicent Bruton, lying on the
sofa, let the thread snap; snored. Contrary winds buffeted at the street
corner. They looked in at a shop window; they did not wish to buy or to
talk but to part, only with contrary winds buffeting the street corner,
with some sort of lapse in the tides of the body, two forces meeting in a
swirl, morning and afternoon, they paused. Some newspaper placard
went up in the air, gallantly, like a kite at first, then paused, swooped,
fluttered; and a lady's veil hung. Yellow awnings trembled. The speed of
the morning traffic slackened, and single carts rattled carelessly down
half-empty streets. In Norfolk, of which Richard Dalloway was half
thinking, a soft warm wind blew back the petals; confused the waters;
ruffled the flowering grasses. Haymakers, who had pitched beneath
hedges to sleep away the morning toil, parted curtains of green blades;
moved trembling globes of cow parsley to see the sky; the blue, the
steadfast, the blazing summer sky.
Aware that he was looking at a silver two-handled Jacobean mug, and
that Hugh Whitbread admired condescendingly with airs of connois-
seurship a Spanish necklace which he thought of asking the price of in
case Evelyn might like it—still Richard was torpid; could not think or
move. Life had thrown up this wreckage; shop windows full of coloured
paste, and one stood stark with the lethargy of the old, stiff with the ri-
gidity of the old, looking in. Evelyn Whitbread might like to buy this
Spanish necklace—so she might. Yawn he must. Hugh was going into
the shop.
"Right you are!" said Richard, following.
Goodness knows he didn't want to go buying necklaces with Hugh.
But there are tides in the body. Morning meets afternoon. Borne like a
frail shallop on deep, deep floods, Lady Bruton's great-grandfather and
his memoir and his campaigns in North America were whelmed and
sunk. And Millicent Bruton too. She went under. Richard didn't care a
straw what became of Emigration; about that letter, whether the editor
put it in or not. The necklace hung stretched between Hugh's admirable
fingers. Let him give it to a girl, if he must buy jewels—any girl, any girl
in the street. For the worthlessness of this life did strike Richard pretty
forcibly—buying necklaces for Evelyn. If he'd had a boy he'd have said,
Work, work. But he had his Elizabeth; he adored his Elizabeth.
81
"I should like to see Mr. Dubonnet," said Hugh in his curt worldly
way. It appeared that this Dubonnet had the measurements of Mrs.
Whitbread's neck, or, more strangely still, knew her views upon Spanish
jewellery and the extent of her possessions in that line (which Hugh
could not remember). All of which seemed to Richard Dalloway awfully
odd. For he never gave Clarissa presents, except a bracelet two or three
years ago, which had not been a success. She never wore it. It pained him
to remember that she never wore it. And as a single spider's thread after
wavering here and there attaches itself to the point of a leaf, so Richard's
mind, recovering from its lethargy, set now on his wife, Clarissa, whom
Peter Walsh had loved so passionately; and Richard had had a sudden
vision of her there at luncheon; of himself and Clarissa; of their life to-
gether; and he drew the tray of old jewels towards him, and taking up
first this brooch then that ring, "How much is that?" he asked, but
doubted his own taste. He wanted to open the drawing-room door and
come in holding out something; a present for Clarissa. Only what? But
Hugh was on his legs again. He was unspeakably pompous. Really, after
dealing here for thirty-five years he was not going to be put off by a mere
boy who did not know his business. For Dubonnet, it seemed, was out,
and Hugh would not buy anything until Mr. Dubonnet chose to be in; at
which the youth flushed and bowed his correct little bow. It was all per-
fectly correct. And yet Richard couldn't have said that to save his life!
Why these people stood that damned insolence he could not conceive.
Hugh was becoming an intolerable ass. Richard Dalloway could not
stand more than an hour of his society. And, flicking his bowler hat by
way of farewell, Richard turned at the corner of Conduit Street eager,
yes, very eager, to travel that spider's thread of attachment between him-
self and Clarissa; he would go straight to her, in Westminster.
But he wanted to come in holding something. Flowers? Yes, flowers,
since he did not trust his taste in gold; any number of flowers, roses,
orchids, to celebrate what was, reckoning things as you will, an event;
this feeling about her when they spoke of Peter Walsh at luncheon; and
they never spoke of it; not for years had they spoken of it; which, he
thought, grasping his red and white roses together (a vast bunch in tis-
sue paper), is the greatest mistake in the world. The time comes when it
can't be said; one's too shy to say it, he thought, pocketing his sixpence or
two of change, setting off with his great bunch held against his body to
Westminster to say straight out in so many words (whatever she might
think of him), holding out his flowers, "I love you." Why not? Really it
was a miracle thinking of the war, and thousands of poor chaps, with all
82
their lives before them, shovelled together, already half forgotten; it was
a miracle. Here he was walking across London to say to Clarissa in so
many words that he loved her. Which one never does say, he thought.
Partly one's lazy; partly one's shy. And Clarissa—it was difficult to think
of her; except in starts, as at luncheon, when he saw her quite distinctly;
their whole life. He stopped at the crossing; and repeated—being simple
by nature, and undebauched, because he had tramped, and shot; being
pertinacious and dogged, having championed the down-trodden and
followed his instincts in the House of Commons; being preserved in his
simplicity yet at the same time grown rather speechless, rather stiff—he
repeated that it was a miracle that he should have married Clarissa; a
miracle—his life had been a miracle, he thought; hesitating to cross. But
it did make his blood boil to see little creatures of five or six crossing Pic-
cadilly alone. The police ought to have stopped the traffic at once. He
had no illusions about the London police. Indeed, he was collecting evid-
ence of their malpractices; and those costermongers, not allowed to stand
their barrows in the streets; and prostitutes, good Lord, the fault wasn't
in them, nor in young men either, but in our detestable social system and
so forth; all of which he considered, could be seen considering, grey,
dogged, dapper, clean, as he walked across the Park to tell his wife that
he loved her.
For he would say it in so many words, when he came into the room.
Because it is a thousand pities never to say what one feels, he thought,
crossing the Green Park and observing with pleasure how in the shade of
the trees whole families, poor families, were sprawling; children kicking
up their legs; sucking milk; paper bags thrown about, which could easily
be picked up (if people objected) by one of those fat gentlemen in livery;
for he was of opinion that every park, and every square, during the sum-
mer months should be open to children (the grass of the park flushed
and faded, lighting up the poor mothers of Westminster and their crawl-
ing babies, as if a yellow lamp were moved beneath). But what could be
done for female vagrants like that poor creature, stretched on her elbow
(as if she had flung herself on the earth, rid of all ties, to observe curi-
ously, to speculate boldly, to consider the whys and the wherefores,
impudent, loose-lipped, humorous), he did not know. Bearing his
flowers like a weapon, Richard Dalloway approached her; intent he
passed her; still there was time for a spark between them—she laughed
at the sight of him, he smiled good-humouredly, considering the prob-
lem of the female vagrant; not that they would ever speak. But he would
tell Clarissa that he loved her, in so many words. He had, once upon a
83
time, been jealous of Peter Walsh; jealous of him and Clarissa. But she
had often said to him that she had been right not to marry Peter Walsh;
which, knowing Clarissa, was obviously true; she wanted support. Not
that she was weak; but she wanted support.
As for Buckingham Palace (like an old prima donna facing the audi-
ence all in white) you can't deny it a certain dignity, he considered, nor
despise what does, after all, stand to millions of people (a little crowd
was waiting at the gate to see the King drive out) for a symbol, absurd
though it is; a child with a box of bricks could have done better, he
thought; looking at the memorial to Queen Victoria (whom he could re-
member in her horn spectacles driving through Kensington), its white
mound, its billowing motherliness; but he liked being ruled by the des-
cendant of Horsa; he liked continuity; and the sense of handing on the
traditions of the past. It was a great age in which to have lived. Indeed,
his own life was a miracle; let him make no mistake about it; here he
was, in the prime of life, walking to his house in Westminster to tell
Clarissa that he loved her. Happiness is this he thought.
It is this, he said, as he entered Dean's Yard. Big Ben was beginning to
strike, first the warning, musical; then the hour, irrevocable. Lunch
parties waste the entire afternoon, he thought, approaching his door.
The sound of Big Ben flooded Clarissa's drawing-room, where she sat,
ever so annoyed, at her writing-table; worried; annoyed. It was perfectly
true that she had not asked Ellie Henderson to her party; but she had
done it on purpose. Now Mrs. Marsham wrote "she had told Ellie
Henderson she would ask Clarissa—Ellie so much wanted to come."
But why should she invite all the dull women in London to her
parties? Why should Mrs. Marsham interfere? And there was Elizabeth
closeted all this time with Doris Kilman. Anything more nauseating she
could not conceive. Prayer at this hour with that woman. And the sound
of the bell flooded the room with its melancholy wave; which receded,
and gathered itself together to fall once more, when she heard, distract-
ingly, something fumbling, something scratching at the door. Who at this
hour? Three, good Heavens! Three already! For with overpowering dir-
ectness and dignity the clock struck three; and she heard nothing else;
but the door handle slipped round and in came Richard! What a sur-
prise! In came Richard, holding out flowers. She had failed him, once at
Constantinople; and Lady Bruton, whose lunch parties were said to be
extraordinarily amusing, had not asked her. He was holding out
flowers—roses, red and white roses. (But he could not bring himself to
say he loved her; not in so many words.)
84
But how lovely, she said, taking his flowers. She understood; she un-
derstood without his speaking; his Clarissa. She put them in vases on the
mantelpiece. How lovely they looked! she said. And was it amusing, she
asked? Had Lady Bruton asked after her? Peter Walsh was back. Mrs.
Marsham had written. Must she ask Ellie Henderson? That woman Kil-
man was upstairs.
"But let us sit down for five minutes," said Richard.
It all looked so empty. All the chairs were against the wall. What had
they been doing? Oh, it was for the party; no, he had not forgotten, the
party. Peter Walsh was back. Oh yes; she had had him. And he was go-
ing to get a divorce; and he was in love with some woman out there.
And he hadn't changed in the slightest. There she was, mending her
dress... .
"Thinking of Bourton," she said.
"Hugh was at lunch," said Richard. She had met him too! Well, he was
getting absolutely intolerable. Buying Evelyn necklaces; fatter than ever;
an intolerable ass.
"And it came over me 'I might have married you,'" she said, thinking
of Peter sitting there in his little bow-tie; with that knife, opening it, shut-
ting it. "Just as he always was, you know."
They were talking about him at lunch, said Richard. (But he could not
tell her he loved her. He held her hand. Happiness is this, he thought.)
They had been writing a letter to the Times for Millicent Bruton. That was
about all Hugh was fit for.
"And our dear Miss Kilman?" he asked. Clarissa thought the roses ab-
solutely lovely; first bunched together; now of their own accord starting
apart.
"Kilman arrives just as we've done lunch," she said. "Elizabeth turns
pink. They shut themselves up. I suppose they're praying."
Lord! He didn't like it; but these things pass over if you let them.
"In a mackintosh with an umbrella," said Clarissa.
He had not said "I love you"; but he held her hand. Happiness is this,
is this, he thought.
"But why should I ask all the dull women in London to my parties?"
said Clarissa. And if Mrs. Marsham gave a party, did she invite her
guests?
"Poor Ellie Henderson," said Richard—it was a very odd thing how
much Clarissa minded about her parties, he thought.
But Richard had no notion of the look of a room. However—what was
he going to say?
85
If she worried about these parties he would not let her give them. Did
she wish she had married Peter? But he must go.
He must be off, he said, getting up. But he stood for a moment as if he
were about to say something; and she wondered what? Why? There
were the roses.
"Some Committee?" she asked, as he opened the door.
"Armenians," he said; or perhaps it was "Albanians."
And there is a dignity in people; a solitude; even between husband
and wife a gulf; and that one must respect, thought Clarissa, watching
him open the door; for one would not part with it oneself, or take it,
against his will, from one's husband, without losing one's independence,
one's self-respect—something, after all, priceless.
He returned with a pillow and a quilt.
"An hour's complete rest after luncheon," he said. And he went.
How like him! He would go on saying "An hour's complete rest after
luncheon" to the end of time, because a doctor had ordered it once. It
was like him to take what doctors said literally; part of his adorable, di-
vine simplicity, which no one had to the same extent; which made him
go and do the thing while she and Peter frittered their time away bicker-
ing. He was already halfway to the House of Commons, to his Armeni-
ans, his Albanians, having settled her on the sofa, looking at his roses.
And people would say, "Clarissa Dalloway is spoilt." She cared much
more for her roses than for the Armenians. Hunted out of existence,
maimed, frozen, the victims of cruelty and injustice (she had heard
Richard say so over and over again)—no, she could feel nothing for the
Albanians, or was it the Armenians? but she loved her roses (didn't that
help the Armenians?)—the only flowers she could bear to see cut. But
Richard was already at the House of Commons; at his Committee, hav-
ing settled all her difficulties. But no; alas, that was not true. He did not
see the reasons against asking Ellie Henderson. She would do it, of
course, as he wished it. Since he had brought the pillows, she would lie
down... . But—but—why did she suddenly feel, for no reason that she
could discover, desperately unhappy? As a person who has dropped
some grain of pearl or diamond into the grass and parts the tall blades
very carefully, this way and that, and searches here and there vainly, and
at last spies it there at the roots, so she went through one thing and an-
other; no, it was not Sally Seton saying that Richard would never be in
the Cabinet because he had a second-class brain (it came back to her); no,
she did not mind that; nor was it to do with Elizabeth either and Doris
Kilman; those were facts. It was a feeling, some unpleasant feeling,
86
earlier in the day perhaps; something that Peter had said, combined with
some depression of her own, in her bedroom, taking off her hat; and
what Richard had said had added to it, but what had he said? There
were his roses. Her parties! That was it! Her parties! Both of them criti-
cised her very unfairly, laughed at her very unjustly, for her parties. That
was it! That was it!
Well, how was she going to defend herself? Now that she knew what
it was, she felt perfectly happy. They thought, or Peter at any rate
thought, that she enjoyed imposing herself; liked to have famous people
about her; great names; was simply a snob in short. Well, Peter might
think so. Richard merely thought it foolish of her to like excitement when
she knew it was bad for her heart. It was childish, he thought. And both
were quite wrong. What she liked was simply life.
"That's what I do it for," she said, speaking aloud, to life.
Since she was lying on the sofa, cloistered, exempt, the presence of this
thing which she felt to be so obvious became physically existent; with
robes of sound from the street, sunny, with hot breath, whispering,
blowing out the blinds. But suppose Peter said to her, "Yes, yes, but your
parties—what's the sense of your parties?" all she could say was (and
nobody could be expected to understand): They're an offering; which
sounded horribly vague. But who was Peter to make out that life was all
plain sailing?—Peter always in love, always in love with the wrong wo-
man? What's your love? she might say to him. And she knew his answer;
how it is the most important thing in the world and no woman possibly
understood it. Very well. But could any man understand what she meant
either? about life? She could not imagine Peter or Richard taking the
trouble to give a party for no reason whatever.
But to go deeper, beneath what people said (and these judgements,
how superficial, how fragmentary they are!) in her own mind now, what
did it mean to her, this thing she called life? Oh, it was very queer. Here
was So-and-so in South Kensington; some one up in Bayswater; and
somebody else, say, in Mayfair. And she felt quite continuously a sense
of their existence; and she felt what a waste; and she felt what a pity; and
she felt if only they could be brought together; so she did it. And it was
an offering; to combine, to create; but to whom?
An offering for the sake of offering, perhaps. Anyhow, it was her gift.
Nothing else had she of the slightest importance; could not think, write,
even play the piano. She muddled Armenians and Turks; loved success;
hated discomfort; must be liked; talked oceans of nonsense: and to this
day, ask her what the Equator was, and she did not know. All the same,
87
that one day should follow another; Wednesday, Thursday, Friday,
Saturday; that one should wake up in the morning; see the sky; walk in
the park; meet Hugh Whitbread; then suddenly in came Peter; then these
roses; it was enough. After that, how unbelievable death was!—that it
must end; and no one in the whole world would know how she had
loved it all; how, every instant ...
The door opened. Elizabeth knew that her mother was resting. She
came in very quietly. She stood perfectly still. Was it that some Mongol
had been wrecked on the coast of Norfolk (as Mrs. Hilbery said), had
mixed with the Dalloway ladies, perhaps, a hundred years ago? For the
Dalloways, in general, were fair-haired; blue-eyed; Elizabeth, on the con-
trary, was dark; had Chinese eyes in a pale face; an Oriental mystery;
was gentle, considerate, still. As a child, she had had a perfect sense of
humour; but now at seventeen, why, Clarissa could not in the least un-
derstand, she had become very serious; like a hyacinth, sheathed in
glossy green, with buds just tinted, a hyacinth which has had no sun.
She stood quite still and looked at her mother; but the door was ajar,
and outside the door was Miss Kilman, as Clarissa knew; Miss Kilman in
her mackintosh, listening to whatever they said.
Yes, Miss Kilman stood on the landing, and wore a mackintosh; but
had her reasons. First, it was cheap; second, she was over forty; and did
not, after all, dress to please. She was poor, moreover; degradingly poor.
Otherwise she would not be taking jobs from people like the Dalloways;
from rich people, who liked to be kind. Mr. Dalloway, to do him justice,
had been kind. But Mrs. Dalloway had not. She had been merely condes-
cending. She came from the most worthless of all classes—the rich, with
a smattering of culture. They had expensive things everywhere; pictures,
carpets, lots of servants. She considered that she had a perfect right to
anything that the Dalloways did for her.
She had been cheated. Yes, the word was no exaggeration, for surely a
girl has a right to some kind of happiness? And she had never been
happy, what with being so clumsy and so poor. And then, just as she
might have had a chance at Miss Dolby's school, the war came; and she
had never been able to tell lies. Miss Dolby thought she would be happi-
er with people who shared her views about the Germans. She had had to
go. It was true that the family was of German origin; spelt the name
Kiehlman in the eighteenth century; but her brother had been killed.
They turned her out because she would not pretend that the Germans
were all villains—when she had German friends, when the only happy
days of her life had been spent in Germany! And after all, she could read
88
history. She had had to take whatever she could get. Mr. Dalloway had
come across her working for the Friends. He had allowed her (and that
was really generous of him) to teach his daughter history. Also she did a
little Extension lecturing and so on. Then Our Lord had come to her (and
here she always bowed her head). She had seen the light two years and
three months ago. Now she did not envy women like Clarissa Dalloway;
she pitied them.
She pitied and despised them from the bottom of her heart, as she
stood on the soft carpet, looking at the old engraving of a little girl with a
muff. With all this luxury going on, what hope was there for a better
state of things? Instead of lying on a sofa—"My mother is resting," Eliza-
beth had said—she should have been in a factory; behind a counter; Mrs.
Dalloway and all the other fine ladies!
Bitter and burning, Miss Kilman had turned into a church two years
three months ago. She had heard the Rev. Edward Whittaker preach; the
boys sing; had seen the solemn lights descend, and whether it was the
music, or the voices (she herself when alone in the evening found com-
fort in a violin; but the sound was excruciating; she had no ear), the hot
and turbulent feelings which boiled and surged in her had been as-
suaged as she sat there, and she had wept copiously, and gone to call on
Mr. Whittaker at his private house in Kensington. It was the hand of
God, he said. The Lord had shown her the way. So now, whenever the
hot and painful feelings boiled within her, this hatred of Mrs. Dalloway,
this grudge against the world, she thought of God. She thought of Mr.
Whittaker. Rage was succeeded by calm. A sweet savour filled her veins,
her lips parted, and, standing formidable upon the landing in her mack-
intosh, she looked with steady and sinister serenity at Mrs. Dalloway,
who came out with her daughter.
Elizabeth said she had forgotten her gloves. That was because Miss
Kilman and her mother hated each other. She could not bear to see them
together. She ran upstairs to find her gloves.
But Miss Kilman did not hate Mrs. Dalloway. Turning her large
gooseberry-coloured eyes upon Clarissa, observing her small pink face,
her delicate body, her air of freshness and fashion, Miss Kilman felt,
Fool! Simpleton! You who have known neither sorrow nor pleasure; who
have trifled your life away! And there rose in her an overmastering de-
sire to overcome her; to unmask her. If she could have felled her it would
have eased her. But it was not the body; it was the soul and its mockery
that she wished to subdue; make feel her mastery. If only she could
make her weep; could ruin her; humiliate her; bring her to her knees
89
crying, You are right! But this was God's will, not Miss Kilman's. It was
to be a religious victory. So she glared; so she glowered.
Clarissa was really shocked. This a Christian—this woman! This wo-
man had taken her daughter from her! She in touch with invisible pres-
ences! Heavy, ugly, commonplace, without kindness or grace, she know
the meaning of life!
"You are taking Elizabeth to the Stores?" Mrs. Dalloway said.
Miss Kilman said she was. They stood there. Miss Kilman was not go-
ing to make herself agreeable. She had always earned her living. Her
knowledge of modern history was thorough in the extreme. She did out
of her meagre income set aside so much for causes she believed in;
whereas this woman did nothing, believed nothing; brought up her
daughter—but here was Elizabeth, rather out of breath, the beautiful girl.
So they were going to the Stores. Odd it was, as Miss Kilman stood
there (and stand she did, with the power and taciturnity of some prehis-
toric monster armoured for primeval warfare), how, second by second,
the idea of her diminished, how hatred (which was for ideas, not people)
crumbled, how she lost her malignity, her size, became second by second
merely Miss Kilman, in a mackintosh, whom Heaven knows Clarissa
would have liked to help.
At this dwindling of the monster, Clarissa laughed. Saying good-bye,
she laughed.
Off they went together, Miss Kilman and Elizabeth, downstairs.
With a sudden impulse, with a violent anguish, for this woman was
taking her daughter from her, Clarissa leant over the bannisters and
cried out, "Remember the party! Remember our party tonight!"
But Elizabeth had already opened the front door; there was a van
passing; she did not answer.
Love and religion! thought Clarissa, going back into the drawing-
room, tingling all over. How detestable, how detestable they are! For
now that the body of Miss Kilman was not before her, it overwhelmed
her—the idea. The cruelest things in the world, she thought, seeing them
clumsy, hot, domineering, hypocritical, eavesdropping, jealous, infinitely
cruel and unscrupulous, dressed in a mackintosh coat, on the landing;
love and religion. Had she ever tried to convert any one herself? Did she
not wish everybody merely to be themselves? And she watched out of
the window the old lady opposite climbing upstairs. Let her climb up-
stairs if she wanted to; let her stop; then let her, as Clarissa had often
seen her, gain her bedroom, part her curtains, and disappear again into
the background. Somehow one respected that—that old woman looking
90
out of the window, quite unconscious that she was being watched. There
was something solemn in it—but love and religion would destroy that,
whatever it was, the privacy of the soul. The odious Kilman would des-
troy it. Yet it was a sight that made her want to cry.
Love destroyed too. Everything that was fine, everything that was true
went. Take Peter Walsh now. There was a man, charming, clever, with
ideas about everything. If you wanted to know about Pope, say, or Ad-
dison, or just to talk nonsense, what people were like, what things
meant, Peter knew better than any one. It was Peter who had helped her;
Peter who had lent her books. But look at the women he loved—vulgar,
trivial, commonplace. Think of Peter in love—he came to see her after all
these years, and what did he talk about? Himself. Horrible passion! she
thought. Degrading passion! she thought, thinking of Kilman and her El-
izabeth walking to the Army and Navy Stores.
Big Ben struck the half-hour.
How extraordinary it was, strange, yes, touching, to see the old lady
(they had been neighbours ever so many years) move away from the
window, as if she were attached to that sound, that string. Gigantic as it
was, it had something to do with her. Down, down, into the midst of or-
dinary things the finger fell making the moment solemn. She was forced,
so Clarissa imagined, by that sound, to move, to go—but where? Clarissa
tried to follow her as she turned and disappeared, and could still just see
her white cap moving at the back of the bedroom. She was still there
moving about at the other end of the room. Why creeds and prayers and
mackintoshes? when, thought Clarissa, that's the miracle, that's the mys-
tery; that old lady, she meant, whom she could see going from chest of
drawers to dressing-table. She could still see her. And the supreme mys-
tery which Kilman might say she had solved, or Peter might say he had
solved, but Clarissa didn't believe either of them had the ghost of an idea
of solving, was simply this: here was one room; there another. Did reli-
gion solve that, or love?
Love—but here the other clock, the clock which always struck two
minutes after Big Ben, came shuffling in with its lap full of odds and
ends, which it dumped down as if Big Ben were all very well with his
majesty laying down the law, so solemn, so just, but she must remember
all sorts of little things besides—Mrs. Marsham, Ellie Henderson, glasses
for ices—all sorts of little things came flooding and lapping and dancing
in on the wake of that solemn stroke which lay flat like a bar of gold on
the sea. Mrs. Marsham, Ellie Henderson, glasses for ices. She must tele-
phone now at once.
91
Volubly, troublously, the late clock sounded, coming in on the wake of
Big Ben, with its lap full of trifles. Beaten up, broken up by the assault of
carriages, the brutality of vans, the eager advance of myriads of angular
men, of flaunting women, the domes and spires of offices and hospitals,
the last relics of this lap full of odds and ends seemed to break, like the
spray of an exhausted wave, upon the body of Miss Kilman standing still
in the street for a moment to mutter "It is the flesh."
It was the flesh that she must control. Clarissa Dalloway had insulted
her. That she expected. But she had not triumphed; she had not mastered
the flesh. Ugly, clumsy, Clarissa Dalloway had laughed at her for being
that; and had revived the fleshly desires, for she minded looking as she
did beside Clarissa. Nor could she talk as she did. But why wish to re-
semble her? Why? She despised Mrs. Dalloway from the bottom of her
heart. She was not serious. She was not good. Her life was a tissue of
vanity and deceit. Yet Doris Kilman had been overcome. She had, as a
matter of fact, very nearly burst into tears when Clarissa Dalloway
laughed at her. "It is the flesh, it is the flesh," she muttered (it being her
habit to talk aloud) trying to subdue this turbulent and painful feeling as
she walked down Victoria Street. She prayed to God. She could not help
being ugly; she could not afford to buy pretty clothes. Clarissa Dalloway
had laughed—but she would concentrate her mind upon something else
until she had reached the pillar-box. At any rate she had got Elizabeth.
But she would think of something else; she would think of Russia; until
she reached the pillar-box.
How nice it must be, she said, in the country, struggling, as Mr. Whit-
taker had told her, with that violent grudge against the world which had
scorned her, sneered at her, cast her off, beginning with this indig-
nity—the infliction of her unlovable body which people could not bear to
see. Do her hair as she might, her forehead remained like an egg, bald,
white. No clothes suited her. She might buy anything. And for a woman,
of course, that meant never meeting the opposite sex. Never would she
come first with any one. Sometimes lately it had seemed to her that, ex-
cept for Elizabeth, her food was all that she lived for; her comforts; her
dinner, her tea; her hot-water bottle at night. But one must fight; van-
quish; have faith in God. Mr. Whittaker had said she was there for a pur-
pose. But no one knew the agony! He said, pointing to the crucifix, that
God knew. But why should she have to suffer when other women, like
Clarissa Dalloway, escaped? Knowledge comes through suffering, said
Mr. Whittaker.
92
She had passed the pillar-box, and Elizabeth had turned into the cool
brown tobacco department of the Army and Navy Stores while she was
still muttering to herself what Mr. Whittaker had said about knowledge
coming through suffering and the flesh. "The flesh," she muttered.
What department did she want? Elizabeth interrupted her.
"Petticoats," she said abruptly, and stalked straight on to the lift.
Up they went. Elizabeth guided her this way and that; guided her in
her abstraction as if she had been a great child, an unwieldy battleship.
There were the petticoats, brown, decorous, striped, frivolous, solid,
flimsy; and she chose, in her abstraction, portentously, and the girl
serving thought her mad.
Elizabeth rather wondered, as they did up the parcel, what Miss Kil-
man was thinking. They must have their tea, said Miss Kilman, rousing,
collecting herself. They had their tea.
Elizabeth rather wondered whether Miss Kilman could be hungry. It
was her way of eating, eating with intensity, then looking, again and
again, at a plate of sugared cakes on the table next them; then, when a
lady and a child sat down and the child took the cake, could Miss Kil-
man really mind it? Yes, Miss Kilman did mind it. She had wanted that
cake—the pink one. The pleasure of eating was almost the only pure
pleasure left her, and then to be baffled even in that!
When people are happy, they have a reserve, she had told Elizabeth,
upon which to draw, whereas she was like a wheel without a tyre (she
was fond of such metaphors), jolted by every pebble, so she would say
staying on after the lesson standing by the fire-place with her bag of
books, her "satchel," she called it, on a Tuesday morning, after the lesson
was over. And she talked too about the war. After all, there were people
who did not think the English invariably right. There were books. There
were meetings. There were other points of view. Would Elizabeth like to
come with her to listen to So-and-so (a most extraordinary looking old
man)? Then Miss Kilman took her to some church in Kensington and
they had tea with a clergyman. She had lent her books. Law, medicine,
politics, all professions are open to women of your generation, said Miss
Kilman. But for herself, her career was absolutely ruined and was it her
fault? Good gracious, said Elizabeth, no.
And her mother would come calling to say that a hamper had come
from Bourton and would Miss Kilman like some flowers? To Miss Kil-
man she was always very, very nice, but Miss Kilman squashed the
flowers all in a bunch, and hadn't any small talk, and what interested
Miss Kilman bored her mother, and Miss Kilman and she were terrible
93
together; and Miss Kilman swelled and looked very plain. But then Miss
Kilman was frightfully clever. Elizabeth had never thought about the
poor. They lived with everything they wanted,—her mother had break-
fast in bed every day; Lucy carried it up; and she liked old women be-
cause they were Duchesses, and being descended from some Lord. But
Miss Kilman said (one of those Tuesday mornings when the lesson was
over), "My grandfather kept an oil and colour shop in Kensington." Miss
Kilman made one feel so small.
Miss Kilman took another cup of tea. Elizabeth, with her oriental bear-
ing, her inscrutable mystery, sat perfectly upright; no, she did not want
anything more. She looked for her gloves—her white gloves. They were
under the table. Ah, but she must not go! Miss Kilman could not let her
go! this youth, that was so beautiful, this girl, whom she genuinely
loved! Her large hand opened and shut on the table.
But perhaps it was a little flat somehow, Elizabeth felt. And really she
would like to go.
But said Miss Kilman, "I've not quite finished yet."
Of course, then, Elizabeth would wait. But it was rather stuffy in here.
"Are you going to the party to-night?" Miss Kilman said. Elizabeth
supposed she was going; her mother wanted her to go. She must not let
parties absorb her, Miss Kilman said, fingering the last two inches of a
chocolate éclair.
She did not much like parties, Elizabeth said. Miss Kilman opened her
mouth, slightly projected her chin, and swallowed down the last inches
of the chocolate éclair, then wiped her fingers, and washed the tea round
in her cup.
She was about to split asunder, she felt. The agony was so terrific. If
she could grasp her, if she could clasp her, if she could make her hers ab-
solutely and forever and then die; that was all she wanted. But to sit
here, unable to think of anything to say; to see Elizabeth turning against
her; to be felt repulsive even by her—it was too much; she could not
stand it. The thick fingers curled inwards.
"I never go to parties," said Miss Kilman, just to keep Elizabeth from
going. "People don't ask me to parties"—and she knew as she said it that
it was this egotism that was her undoing; Mr. Whittaker had warned her;
but she could not help it. She had suffered so horribly. "Why should they
ask me?" she said. "I'm plain, I'm unhappy." She knew it was idiotic. But
it was all those people passing—people with parcels who despised her,
who made her say it. However, she was Doris Kilman. She had her
94
degree. She was a woman who had made her way in the world. Her
knowledge of modern history was more than respectable.
"I don't pity myself," she said. "I pity"—she meant to say "your moth-
er" but no, she could not, not to Elizabeth. "I pity other people," she said,
"more."
Like some dumb creature who has been brought up to a gate for an
unknown purpose, and stands there longing to gallop away, Elizabeth
Dalloway sat silent. Was Miss Kilman going to say anything more?
"Don't quite forget me," said Doris Kilman; her voice quivered. Right
away to the end of the field the dumb creature galloped in terror.
The great hand opened and shut.
Elizabeth turned her head. The waitress came. One had to pay at the
desk, Elizabeth said, and went off, drawing out, so Miss Kilman felt, the
very entrails in her body, stretching them as she crossed the room, and
then, with a final twist, bowing her head very politely, she went.
She had gone. Miss Kilman sat at the marble table among the éclairs,
stricken once, twice, thrice by shocks of suffering. She had gone. Mrs.
Dalloway had triumphed. Elizabeth had gone. Beauty had gone, youth
had gone.
So she sat. She got up, blundered off among the little tables, rocking
slightly from side to side, and somebody came after her with her petti-
coat, and she lost her way, and was hemmed in by trunks specially pre-
pared for taking to India; next got among the accouchement sets, and
baby linen; through all the commodities of the world, perishable and
permanent, hams, drugs, flowers, stationery, variously smelling, now
sweet, now sour she lurched; saw herself thus lurching with her hat
askew, very red in the face, full length in a looking-glass; and at last
came out into the street.
The tower of Westminster Cathedral rose in front of her, the habitation
of God. In the midst of the traffic, there was the habitation of God. Dog-
gedly she set off with her parcel to that other sanctuary, the Abbey,
where, raising her hands in a tent before her face, she sat beside those
driven into shelter too; the variously assorted worshippers, now divested
of social rank, almost of sex, as they raised their hands before their faces;
but once they removed them, instantly reverent, middle class, English
men and women, some of them desirous of seeing the wax works.
But Miss Kilman held her tent before her face. Now she was deserted;
now rejoined. New worshippers came in from the street to replace the
strollers, and still, as people gazed round and shuffled past the tomb of
the Unknown Warrior, still she barred her eyes with her fingers and
95
tried in this double darkness, for the light in the Abbey was bodiless, to
aspire above the vanities, the desires, the commodities, to rid herself
both of hatred and of love. Her hands twitched. She seemed to struggle.
Yet to others God was accessible and the path to Him smooth. Mr.
Fletcher, retired, of the Treasury, Mrs. Gorham, widow of the famous
K.C., approached Him simply, and having done their praying, leant
back, enjoyed the music (the organ pealed sweetly), and saw Miss Kil-
man at the end of the row, praying, praying, and, being still on the
threshold of their underworld, thought of her sympathetically as a soul
haunting the same territory; a soul cut out of immaterial substance; not a
woman, a soul.
But Mr. Fletcher had to go. He had to pass her, and being himself neat
as a new pin, could not help being a little distressed by the poor lady's
disorder; her hair down; her parcel on the floor. She did not at once let
him pass. But, as he stood gazing about him, at the white marbles, grey
window panes, and accumulated treasures (for he was extremely proud
of the Abbey), her largeness, robustness, and power as she sat there shift-
ing her knees from time to time (it was so rough the approach to her
God—so tough her desires) impressed him, as they had impressed Mrs.
Dalloway (she could not get the thought of her out of her mind that af-
ternoon), the Rev. Edward Whittaker, and Elizabeth too.
And Elizabeth waited in Victoria Street for an omnibus. It was so nice
to be out of doors. She thought perhaps she need not go home just yet. It
was so nice to be out in the air. So she would get on to an omnibus. And
already, even as she stood there, in her very well cut clothes, it was be-
ginning... . People were beginning to compare her to poplar trees, early
dawn, hyacinths, fawns, running water, and garden lilies; and it made
her life a burden to her, for she so much preferred being left alone to do
what she liked in the country, but they would compare her to lilies, and
she had to go to parties, and London was so dreary compared with being
alone in the country with her father and the dogs.
Buses swooped, settled, were off—garish caravans, glistening with red
and yellow varnish. But which should she get on to? She had no prefer-
ences. Of course, she would not push her way. She inclined to be passive.
It was expression she needed, but her eyes were fine, Chinese, oriental,
and, as her mother said, with such nice shoulders and holding herself so
straight, she was always charming to look at; and lately, in the evening
especially, when she was interested, for she never seemed excited, she
looked almost beautiful, very stately, very serene. What could she be
thinking? Every man fell in love with her, and she was really awfully
96
bored. For it was beginning. Her mother could see that—the compli-
ments were beginning. That she did not care more about it—for instance
for her clothes—sometimes worried Clarissa, but perhaps it was as well
with all those puppies and guinea pigs about having distemper, and it
gave her a charm. And now there was this odd friendship with Miss Kil-
man. Well, thought Clarissa about three o'clock in the morning, reading
Baron Marbot for she could not sleep, it proves she has a heart.
Suddenly Elizabeth stepped forward and most competently boarded
the omnibus, in front of everybody. She took a seat on top. The impetu-
ous creature—a pirate—started forward, sprang away; she had to hold
the rail to steady herself, for a pirate it was, reckless, unscrupulous, bear-
ing down ruthlessly, circumventing dangerously, boldly snatching a pas-
senger, or ignoring a passenger, squeezing eel-like and arrogant in
between, and then rushing insolently all sails spread up Whitehall. And
did Elizabeth give one thought to poor Miss Kilman who loved her
without jealousy, to whom she had been a fawn in the open, a moon in a
glade? She was delighted to be free. The fresh air was so delicious. It had
been so stuffy in the Army and Navy Stores. And now it was like riding,
to be rushing up Whitehall; and to each movement of the omnibus the
beautiful body in the fawn-coloured coat responded freely like a rider,
like the figure-head of a ship, for the breeze slightly disarrayed her; the
heat gave her cheeks the pallor of white painted wood; and her fine eyes,
having no eyes to meet, gazed ahead, blank, bright, with the staring in-
credible innocence of sculpture.
It was always talking about her own sufferings that made Miss Kilman
so difficult. And was she right? If it was being on committees and giving
up hours and hours every day (she hardly ever saw him in London) that
helped the poor, her father did that, goodness knows,—if that was what
Miss Kilman meant about being a Christian; but it was so difficult to say.
Oh, she would like to go a little further. Another penny was it to the
Strand? Here was another penny then. She would go up the Strand.
She liked people who were ill. And every profession is open to the wo-
men of your generation, said Miss Kilman. So she might be a doctor. She
might be a farmer. Animals are often ill. She might own a thousand acres
and have people under her. She would go and see them in their cottages.
This was Somerset House. One might be a very good farmer—and that,
strangely enough though Miss Kilman had her share in it, was almost
entirely due to Somerset House. It looked so splendid, so serious, that
great grey building. And she liked the feeling of people working. She
liked those churches, like shapes of grey paper, breasting the stream of
97
the Strand. It was quite different here from Westminster, she thought,
getting off at Chancery Lane. It was so serious; it was so busy. In short,
she would like to have a profession. She would become a doctor, a farm-
er, possibly go into Parliament, if she found it necessary, all because of
the Strand.
The feet of those people busy about their activities, hands putting
stone to stone, minds eternally occupied not with trivial chatterings
(comparing women to poplars—which was rather exciting, of course, but
very silly), but with thoughts of ships, of business, of law, of administra-
tion, and with it all so stately (she was in the Temple), gay (there was the
river), pious (there was the Church), made her quite determined,
whatever her mother might say, to become either a farmer or a doctor.
But she was, of course, rather lazy.
And it was much better to say nothing about it. It seemed so silly. It
was the sort of thing that did sometimes happen, when one was
alone—buildings without architects' names, crowds of people coming
back from the city having more power than single clergymen in Kensing-
ton, than any of the books Miss Kilman had lent her, to stimulate what
lay slumbrous, clumsy, and shy on the mind's sandy floor to break sur-
face, as a child suddenly stretches its arms; it was just that, perhaps, a
sigh, a stretch of the arms, an impulse, a revelation, which has its effects
for ever, and then down again it went to the sandy floor. She must go
home. She must dress for dinner. But what was the time?—where was a
clock?
She looked up Fleet Street. She walked just a little way towards St.
Paul's, shyly, like some one penetrating on tiptoe, exploring a strange
house by night with a candle, on edge lest the owner should suddenly
fling wide his bedroom door and ask her business, nor did she dare
wander off into queer alleys, tempting bye-streets, any more than in a
strange house open doors which might be bedroom doors, or sitting-
room doors, or lead straight to the larder. For no Dalloways came down
the Strand daily; she was a pioneer, a stray, venturing, trusting.
In many ways, her mother felt, she was extremely immature, like a
child still, attached to dolls, to old slippers; a perfect baby; and that was
charming. But then, of course, there was in the Dalloway family the tra-
dition of public service. Abbesses, principals, head mistresses, dignitar-
ies, in the republic of women—without being brilliant, any of them, they
were that. She penetrated a little further in the direction of St. Paul's. She
liked the geniality, sisterhood, motherhood, brotherhood of this uproar.
It seemed to her good. The noise was tremendous; and suddenly there
98
were trumpets (the unemployed) blaring, rattling about in the uproar;
military music; as if people were marching; yet had they been dy-
ing—had some woman breathed her last and whoever was watching,
opening the window of the room where she had just brought off that act
of supreme dignity, looked down on Fleet Street, that uproar, that milit-
ary music would have come triumphing up to him, consolatory,
indifferent.
It was not conscious. There was no recognition in it of one fortune, or
fate, and for that very reason even to those dazed with watching for the
last shivers of consciousness on the faces of the dying, consoling. Forget-
fulness in people might wound, their ingratitude corrode, but this voice,
pouring endlessly, year in year out, would take whatever it might be;
this vow; this van; this life; this procession, would wrap them all about
and carry them on, as in the rough stream of a glacier the ice holds a
splinter of bone, a blue petal, some oak trees, and rolls them on.
But it was later than she thought. Her mother would not like her to be
wandering off alone like this. She turned back down the Strand.
A puff of wind (in spite of the heat, there was quite a wind) blew a
thin black veil over the sun and over the Strand. The faces faded; the om-
nibuses suddenly lost their glow. For although the clouds were of moun-
tainous white so that one could fancy hacking hard chips off with a
hatchet, with broad golden slopes, lawns of celestial pleasure gardens,
on their flanks, and had all the appearance of settled habitations as-
sembled for the conference of gods above the world, there was a per-
petual movement among them. Signs were interchanged, when, as if to
fulfil some scheme arranged already, now a summit dwindled, now a
whole block of pyramidal size which had kept its station inalterably ad-
vanced into the midst or gravely led the procession to fresh anchorage.
Fixed though they seemed at their posts, at rest in perfect unanimity,
nothing could be fresher, freer, more sensitive superficially than the
snow-white or gold-kindled surface; to change, to go, to dismantle the
solemn assemblage was immediately possible; and in spite of the grave
fixity, the accumulated robustness and solidity, now they struck light to
the earth, now darkness.
Calmly and competently, Elizabeth Dalloway mounted the Westmin-
ster omnibus.
Going and coming, beckoning, signalling, so the light and shadow
which now made the wall grey, now the bananas bright yellow, now
made the Strand grey, now made the omnibuses bright yellow, seemed
to Septimus Warren Smith lying on the sofa in the sitting-room;
99
watching the watery gold glow and fade with the astonishing sensibility
of some live creature on the roses, on the wall-paper. Outside the trees
dragged their leaves like nets through the depths of the air; the sound of
water was in the room and through the waves came the voices of birds
singing. Every power poured its treasures on his head, and his hand lay
there on the back of the sofa, as he had seen his hand lie when he was
bathing, floating, on the top of the waves, while far away on shore he
heard dogs barking and barking far away. Fear no more, says the heart
in the body; fear no more.
He was not afraid. At every moment Nature signified by some laugh-
ing hint like that gold spot which went round the wall—there, there,
there—her determination to show, by brandishing her plumes, shaking
her tresses, flinging her mantle this way and that, beautifully, always
beautifully, and standing close up to breathe through her hollowed
hands Shakespeare's words, her meaning.
Rezia, sitting at the table twisting a hat in her hands, watched him;
saw him smiling. He was happy then. But she could not bear to see him
smiling. It was not marriage; it was not being one's husband to look
strange like that, always to be starting, laughing, sitting hour after hour
silent, or clutching her and telling her to write. The table drawer was full
of those writings; about war; about Shakespeare; about great discoveries;
how there is no death. Lately he had become excited suddenly for no
reason (and both Dr. Holmes and Sir William Bradshaw said excitement
was the worst thing for him), and waved his hands and cried out that he
knew the truth! He knew everything! That man, his friend who was
killed, Evans, had come, he said. He was singing behind the screen. She
wrote it down just as he spoke it. Some things were very beautiful; oth-
ers sheer nonsense. And he was always stopping in the middle, changing
his mind; wanting to add something; hearing something new; listening
with his hand up.
But she heard nothing.
And once they found the girl who did the room reading one of these
papers in fits of laughter. It was a dreadful pity. For that made Septimus
cry out about human cruelty—how they tear each other to pieces. The
fallen, he said, they tear to pieces. "Holmes is on us," he would say, and
he would invent stories about Holmes; Holmes eating porridge; Holmes
reading Shakespeare—making himself roar with laughter or rage, for Dr.
Holmes seemed to stand for something horrible to him. "Human nature,"
he called him. Then there were the visions. He was drowned, he used to
say, and lying on a cliff with the gulls screaming over him. He would
100
look over the edge of the sofa down into the sea. Or he was hearing mu-
sic. Really it was only a barrel organ or some man crying in the street.
But "Lovely!" he used to cry, and the tears would run down his cheeks,
which was to her the most dreadful thing of all, to see a man like Sep-
timus, who had fought, who was brave, crying. And he would lie listen-
ing until suddenly he would cry that he was falling down, down into the
flames! Actually she would look for flames, it was so vivid. But there
was nothing. They were alone in the room. It was a dream, she would
tell him and so quiet him at last, but sometimes she was frightened too.
She sighed as she sat sewing.
Her sigh was tender and enchanting, like the wind outside a wood in
the evening. Now she put down her scissors; now she turned to take
something from the table. A little stir, a little crinkling, a little tapping
built up something on the table there, where she sat sewing. Through his
eyelashes he could see her blurred outline; her little black body; her face
and hands; her turning movements at the table, as she took up a reel, or
looked (she was apt to lose things) for her silk. She was making a hat for
Mrs. Filmer's married daughter, whose name was—he had forgotten her
name.
"What is the name of Mrs. Filmer's married daughter?" he asked.
"Mrs. Peters," said Rezia. She was afraid it was too small, she said,
holding it before her. Mrs. Peters was a big woman; but she did not like
her. It was only because Mrs. Filmer had been so good to them. "She
gave me grapes this morning," she said—that Rezia wanted to do
something to show that they were grateful. She had come into the room
the other evening and found Mrs. Peters, who thought they were out,
playing the gramophone.
"Was it true?" he asked. She was playing the gramophone? Yes; she
had told him about it at the time; she had found Mrs. Peters playing the
gramophone.
He began, very cautiously, to open his eyes, to see whether a gramo-
phone was really there. But real things—real things were too exciting. He
must be cautious. He would not go mad. First he looked at the fashion
papers on the lower shelf, then, gradually at the gramophone with the
green trumpet. Nothing could be more exact. And so, gathering courage,
he looked at the sideboard; the plate of bananas; the engraving of Queen
Victoria and the Prince Consort; at the mantelpiece, with the jar of roses.
None of these things moved. All were still; all were real.
"She is a woman with a spiteful tongue," said Rezia.
"What does Mr. Peters do?" Septimus asked.
101
"Ah," said Rezia, trying to remember. She thought Mrs. Filmer had
said that he travelled for some company. "Just now he is in Hull," she
said.
"Just now!" She said that with her Italian accent. She said that herself.
He shaded his eyes so that he might see only a little of her face at a time,
first the chin, then the nose, then the forehead, in case it were deformed,
or had some terrible mark on it. But no, there she was, perfectly natural,
sewing, with the pursed lips that women have, the set, the melancholy
expression, when sewing. But there was nothing terrible about it, he as-
sured himself, looking a second time, a third time at her face, her hands,
for what was frightening or disgusting in her as she sat there in broad
daylight, sewing? Mrs. Peters had a spiteful tongue. Mr. Peters was in
Hull. Why then rage and prophesy? Why fly scourged and outcast? Why
be made to tremble and sob by the clouds? Why seek truths and deliver
messages when Rezia sat sticking pins into the front of her dress, and
Mr. Peters was in Hull? Miracles, revelations, agonies, loneliness, falling
through the sea, down, down into the flames, all were burnt out, for he
had a sense, as he watched Rezia trimming the straw hat for Mrs. Peters,
of a coverlet of flowers.
"It's too small for Mrs. Peters," said Septimus.
For the first time for days he was speaking as he used to do! Of course
it was—absurdly small, she said. But Mrs. Peters had chosen it.
He took it out of her hands. He said it was an organ grinder's
monkey's hat.
How it rejoiced her that! Not for weeks had they laughed like this to-
gether, poking fun privately like married people. What she meant was
that if Mrs. Filmer had come in, or Mrs. Peters or anybody they would
not have understood what she and Septimus were laughing at.
"There," she said, pinning a rose to one side of the hat. Never had she
felt so happy! Never in her life!
But that was still more ridiculous, Septimus said. Now the poor wo-
man looked like a pig at a fair. (Nobody ever made her laugh as Sep-
timus did.)
What had she got in her work-box? She had ribbons and beads, tassels,
artificial flowers. She tumbled them out on the table. He began putting
odd colours together—for though he had no fingers, could not even do
up a parcel, he had a wonderful eye, and often he was right, sometimes
absurd, of course, but sometimes wonderfully right.
"She shall have a beautiful hat!" he murmured, taking up this and that,
Rezia kneeling by his side, looking over his shoulder. Now it was
102
finished—that is to say the design; she must stitch it together. But she
must be very, very careful, he said, to keep it just as he had made it.
So she sewed. When she sewed, he thought, she made a sound like a
kettle on the hob; bubbling, murmuring, always busy, her strong little
pointed fingers pinching and poking; her needle flashing straight. The
sun might go in and out, on the tassels, on the wall-paper, but he would
wait, he thought, stretching out his feet, looking at his ringed sock at the
end of the sofa; he would wait in this warm place, this pocket of still air,
which one comes on at the edge of a wood sometimes in the evening,
when, because of a fall in the ground, or some arrangement of the trees
(one must be scientific above all, scientific), warmth lingers, and the air
buffets the cheek like the wing of a bird.
"There it is," said Rezia, twirling Mrs. Peters' hat on the tips of her fin-
gers. "That'll do for the moment. Later ... " her sentence bubbled away
drip, drip, drip, like a contented tap left running.
It was wonderful. Never had he done anything which made him feel
so proud. It was so real, it was so substantial, Mrs. Peters' hat.
"Just look at it," he said.
Yes, it would always make her happy to see that hat. He had become
himself then, he had laughed then. They had been alone together. Al-
ways she would like that hat.
He told her to try it on.
"But I must look so queer!" she cried, running over to the glass and
looking first this side then that. Then she snatched it off again, for there
was a tap at the door. Could it be Sir William Bradshaw? Had he sent
already?
No! it was only the small girl with the evening paper.
What always happened, then happened—what happened every night
of their lives. The small girl sucked her thumb at the door; Rezia went
down on her knees; Rezia cooed and kissed; Rezia got a bag of sweets
out of the table drawer. For so it always happened. First one thing, then
another. So she built it up, first one thing and then another. Dancing,
skipping, round and round the room they went. He took the paper. Sur-
rey was all out, he read. There was a heat wave. Rezia repeated: Surrey
was all out. There was a heat wave, making it part of the game she was
playing with Mrs. Filmer's grandchild, both of them laughing, chattering
at the same time, at their game. He was very tired. He was very happy.
He would sleep. He shut his eyes. But directly he saw nothing the
sounds of the game became fainter and stranger and sounded like the
103
cries of people seeking and not finding, and passing further and further
away. They had lost him!
He started up in terror. What did he see? The plate of bananas on the
sideboard. Nobody was there (Rezia had taken the child to its mother. It
was bedtime). That was it: to be alone forever. That was the doom pro-
nounced in Milan when he came into the room and saw them cutting out
buckram shapes with their scissors; to be alone forever.
He was alone with the sideboard and the bananas. He was alone, ex-
posed on this bleak eminence, stretched out—but not on a hill-top; not
on a crag; on Mrs. Filmer's sitting-room sofa. As for the visions, the faces,
the voices of the dead, where were they? There was a screen in front of
him, with black bulrushes and blue swallows. Where he had once seen
mountains, where he had seen faces, where he had seen beauty, there
was a screen.
"Evans!" he cried. There was no answer. A mouse had squeaked, or a
curtain rustled. Those were the voices of the dead. The screen, the coals-
cuttle, the sideboard remained to him. Let him then face the screen, the
coal-scuttle and the sideboard ... but Rezia burst into the room
chattering.
Some letter had come. Everybody's plans were changed. Mrs. Filmer
would not be able to go to Brighton after all. There was no time to let
Mrs. Williams know, and really Rezia thought it very, very annoying,
when she caught sight of the hat and thought ... perhaps ... she ... might
just make a little... . Her voice died out in contented melody.
"Ah, damn!" she cried (it was a joke of theirs, her swearing), the needle
had broken. Hat, child, Brighton, needle. She built it up; first one thing,
then another, she built it up, sewing.
She wanted him to say whether by moving the rose she had improved
the hat. She sat on the end of the sofa.
They were perfectly happy now, she said, suddenly, putting the hat
down. For she could say anything to him now. She could say whatever
came into her head. That was almost the first thing she had felt about
him, that night in the café when he had come in with his English friends.
He had come in, rather shyly, looking round him, and his hat had fallen
when he hung it up. That she could remember. She knew he was Eng-
lish, though not one of the large Englishmen her sister admired, for he
was always thin; but he had a beautiful fresh colour; and with his big
nose, his bright eyes, his way of sitting a little hunched made her think,
she had often told him, of a young hawk, that first evening she saw him,
when they were playing dominoes, and he had come in—of a young
104
hawk; but with her he was always very gentle. She had never seen him
wild or drunk, only suffering sometimes through this terrible war, but
even so, when she came in, he would put it all away. Anything, anything
in the whole world, any little bother with her work, anything that struck
her to say she would tell him, and he understood at once. Her own fam-
ily even were not the same. Being older than she was and being so clev-
er—how serious he was, wanting her to read Shakespeare before she
could even read a child's story in English!—being so much more experi-
enced, he could help her. And she too could help him.
But this hat now. And then (it was getting late) Sir William Bradshaw.
She held her hands to her head, waiting for him to say did he like the
hat or not, and as she sat there, waiting, looking down, he could feel her
mind, like a bird, falling from branch to branch, and always alighting,
quite rightly; he could follow her mind, as she sat there in one of those
loose lax poses that came to her naturally and, if he should say anything,
at once she smiled, like a bird alighting with all its claws firm upon the
bough.
But he remembered Bradshaw said, "The people we are most fond of
are not good for us when we are ill." Bradshaw said, he must be taught
to rest. Bradshaw said they must be separated.
"Must," "must," why "must"? What power had Bradshaw over him?
"What right has Bradshaw to say 'must' to me?" he demanded.
"It is because you talked of killing yourself," said Rezia. (Mercifully,
she could now say anything to Septimus.)
So he was in their power! Holmes and Bradshaw were on him! The
brute with the red nostrils was snuffing into every secret place! "Must" it
could say! Where were his papers? the things he had written?
She brought him his papers, the things he had written, things she had
written for him. She tumbled them out on to the sofa. They looked at
them together. Diagrams, designs, little men and women brandishing
sticks for arms, with wings—were they?—on their backs; circles traced
round shillings and sixpences—the suns and stars; zigzagging precipices
with mountaineers ascending roped together, exactly like knives and
forks; sea pieces with little faces laughing out of what might perhaps be
waves: the map of the world. Burn them! he cried. Now for his writings;
how the dead sing behind rhododendron bushes; odes to Time; conver-
sations with Shakespeare; Evans, Evans, Evans—his messages from the
dead; do not cut down trees; tell the Prime Minister. Universal love: the
meaning of the world. Burn them! he cried.
105
But Rezia laid her hands on them. Some were very beautiful, she
thought. She would tie them up (for she had no envelope) with a piece of
silk.
Even if they took him, she said, she would go with him. They could
not separate them against their wills, she said.
Shuffling the edges straight, she did up the papers, and tied the parcel
almost without looking, sitting beside him, he thought, as if all her petals
were about her. She was a flowering tree; and through her branches
looked out the face of a lawgiver, who had reached a sanctuary where
she feared no one; not Holmes; not Bradshaw; a miracle, a triumph, the
last and greatest. Staggering he saw her mount the appalling staircase,
laden with Holmes and Bradshaw, men who never weighed less than el-
even stone six, who sent their wives to Court, men who made ten thou-
sand a year and talked of proportion; who different in their verdicts (for
Holmes said one thing, Bradshaw another), yet judges they were; who
mixed the vision and the sideboard; saw nothing clear, yet ruled, yet in-
flicted. "Must" they said. Over them she triumphed.
"There!" she said. The papers were tied up. No one should get at them.
She would put them away.
And, she said, nothing should separate them. She sat down beside him
and called him by the name of that hawk or crow which being malicious
and a great destroyer of crops was precisely like him. No one could sep-
arate them, she said.
Then she got up to go into the bedroom to pack their things, but hear-
ing voices downstairs and thinking that Dr. Holmes had perhaps called,
ran down to prevent him coming up.
Septimus could hear her talking to Holmes on the staircase.
"My dear lady, I have come as a friend," Holmes was saying.
"No. I will not allow you to see my husband," she said.
He could see her, like a little hen, with her wings spread barring his
passage. But Holmes persevered.
"My dear lady, allow me ... " Holmes said, putting her aside (Holmes
was a powerfully built man).
Holmes was coming upstairs. Holmes would burst open the door.
Holmes would say "In a funk, eh?" Holmes would get him. But no; not
Holmes; not Bradshaw. Getting up rather unsteadily, hopping indeed
from foot to foot, he considered Mrs. Filmer's nice clean bread knife with
"Bread" carved on the handle. Ah, but one mustn't spoil that. The gas
fire? But it was too late now. Holmes was coming. Razors he might have
got, but Rezia, who always did that sort of thing, had packed them.
106
There remained only the window, the large Bloomsbury-lodging house
window, the tiresome, the troublesome, and rather melodramatic busi-
ness of opening the window and throwing himself out. It was their idea
of tragedy, not his or Rezia's (for she was with him). Holmes and Brad-
shaw like that sort of thing. (He sat on the sill.) But he would wait till the
very last moment. He did not want to die. Life was good. The sun hot.
Only human beings—what did they want? Coming down the staircase
opposite an old man stopped and stared at him. Holmes was at the door.
"I'll give it you!" he cried, and flung himself vigorously, violently down
on to Mrs. Filmer's area railings.
"The coward!" cried Dr. Holmes, bursting the door open. Rezia ran to
the window, she saw; she understood. Dr. Holmes and Mrs. Filmer col-
lided with each other. Mrs. Filmer flapped her apron and made her hide
her eyes in the bedroom. There was a great deal of running up and down
stairs. Dr. Holmes came in—white as a sheet, shaking all over, with a
glass in his hand. She must be brave and drink something, he said (What
was it? Something sweet), for her husband was horribly mangled, would
not recover consciousness, she must not see him, must be spared as
much as possible, would have the inquest to go through, poor young
woman. Who could have foretold it? A sudden impulse, no one was in
the least to blame (he told Mrs. Filmer). And why the devil he did it, Dr.
Holmes could not conceive.
It seemed to her as she drank the sweet stuff that she was opening
long windows, stepping out into some garden. But where? The clock was
striking—one, two, three: how sensible the sound was; compared with
all this thumping and whispering; like Septimus himself. She was falling
asleep. But the clock went on striking, four, five, six and Mrs. Filmer
waving her apron (they wouldn't bring the body in here, would they?)
seemed part of that garden; or a flag. She had once seen a flag slowly rip-
pling out from a mast when she stayed with her aunt at Venice. Men
killed in battle were thus saluted, and Septimus had been through the
War. Of her memories, most were happy.
She put on her hat, and ran through cornfields—where could it have
been?—on to some hill, somewhere near the sea, for there were ships,
gulls, butterflies; they sat on a cliff. In London too, there they sat, and,
half dreaming, came to her through the bedroom door, rain falling, whis-
perings, stirrings among dry corn, the caress of the sea, as it seemed to
her, hollowing them in its arched shell and murmuring to her laid on
shore, strewn she felt, like flying flowers over some tomb.
107
"He is dead," she said, smiling at the poor old woman who guarded
her with her honest light-blue eyes fixed on the door. (They wouldn't
bring him in here, would they?) But Mrs. Filmer pooh-poohed. Oh no, oh
no! They were carrying him away now. Ought she not to be told? Mar-
ried people ought to be together, Mrs. Filmer thought. But they must do
as the doctor said.
"Let her sleep," said Dr. Holmes, feeling her pulse. She saw the large
outline of his body standing dark against the window. So that was Dr.
Holmes.
One of the triumphs of civilisation, Peter Walsh thought. It is one of
the triumphs of civilisation, as the light high bell of the ambulance soun-
ded. Swiftly, cleanly the ambulance sped to the hospital, having picked
up instantly, humanely, some poor devil; some one hit on the head,
struck down by disease, knocked over perhaps a minute or so ago at one
of these crossings, as might happen to oneself. That was civilisation. It
struck him coming back from the East—the efficiency, the organisation,
the communal spirit of London. Every cart or carriage of its own accord
drew aside to let the ambulance pass. Perhaps it was morbid; or was it
not touching rather, the respect which they showed this ambulance with
its victim inside—busy men hurrying home yet instantly bethinking
them as it passed of some wife; or presumably how easily it might have
been them there, stretched on a shelf with a doctor and a nurse... . Ah,
but thinking became morbid, sentimental, directly one began conjuring
up doctors, dead bodies; a little glow of pleasure, a sort of lust too over
the visual impression warned one not to go on with that sort of thing any
more—fatal to art, fatal to friendship. True. And yet, thought Peter
Walsh, as the ambulance turned the corner though the light high bell
could be heard down the next street and still farther as it crossed the Tot-
tenham Court Road, chiming constantly, it is the privilege of loneliness;
in privacy one may do as one chooses. One might weep if no one saw. It
had been his undoing—this susceptibility—in Anglo-Indian society; not
weeping at the right time, or laughing either. I have that in me, he
thought standing by the pillar-box, which could now dissolve in tears.
Why, Heaven knows. Beauty of some sort probably, and the weight of
the day, which beginning with that visit to Clarissa had exhausted him
with its heat, its intensity, and the drip, drip, of one impression after an-
other down into that cellar where they stood, deep, dark, and no one
would ever know. Partly for that reason, its secrecy, complete and inviol-
able, he had found life like an unknown garden, full of turns and
corners, surprising, yes; really it took one's breath away, these moments;
108
there coming to him by the pillar-box opposite the British Museum one
of them, a moment, in which things came together; this ambulance; and
life and death. It was as if he were sucked up to some very high roof by
that rush of emotion and the rest of him, like a white shell-sprinkled
beach, left bare. It had been his undoing in Anglo-Indian society—this
susceptibility.
Clarissa once, going on top of an omnibus with him somewhere,
Clarissa superficially at least, so easily moved, now in despair, now in
the best of spirits, all aquiver in those days and such good company,
spotting queer little scenes, names, people from the top of a bus, for they
used to explore London and bring back bags full of treasures from the
Caledonian market—Clarissa had a theory in those days—they had
heaps of theories, always theories, as young people have. It was to ex-
plain the feeling they had of dissatisfaction; not knowing people; not be-
ing known. For how could they know each other? You met every day;
then not for six months, or years. It was unsatisfactory, they agreed, how
little one knew people. But she said, sitting on the bus going up Shaftes-
bury Avenue, she felt herself everywhere; not "here, here, here"; and she
tapped the back of the seat; but everywhere. She waved her hand, going
up Shaftesbury Avenue. She was all that. So that to know her, or any
one, one must seek out the people who completed them; even the places.
Odd affinities she had with people she had never spoken to, some wo-
man in the street, some man behind a counter—even trees, or barns. It
ended in a transcendental theory which, with her horror of death, al-
lowed her to believe, or say that she believed (for all her scepticism), that
since our apparitions, the part of us which appears, are so momentary
compared with the other, the unseen part of us, which spreads wide, the
unseen might survive, be recovered somehow attached to this person or
that, or even haunting certain places after death ... perhaps—perhaps.
Looking back over that long friendship of almost thirty years her the-
ory worked to this extent. Brief, broken, often painful as their actual
meetings had been what with his absences and interruptions (this morn-
ing, for instance, in came Elizabeth, like a long-legged colt, handsome,
dumb, just as he was beginning to talk to Clarissa) the effect of them on
his life was immeasurable. There was a mystery about it. You were given
a sharp, acute, uncomfortable grain—the actual meeting; horribly painful
as often as not; yet in absence, in the most unlikely places, it would
flower out, open, shed its scent, let you touch, taste, look about you, get
the whole feel of it and understanding, after years of lying lost. Thus she
had come to him; on board ship; in the Himalayas; suggested by the
109
oddest things (so Sally Seton, generous, enthusiastic goose! thought of
him when she saw blue hydrangeas). She had influenced him more than
any person he had ever known. And always in this way coming before
him without his wishing it, cool, lady-like, critical; or ravishing, ro-
mantic, recalling some field or English harvest. He saw her most often in
the country, not in London. One scene after another at Bourton... .
He had reached his hotel. He crossed the hall, with its mounds of red-
dish chairs and sofas, its spike-leaved, withered-looking plants. He got
his key off the hook. The young lady handed him some letters. He went
upstairs—he saw her most often at Bourton, in the late summer, when he
stayed there for a week, or fortnight even, as people did in those days.
First on top of some hill there she would stand, hands clapped to her
hair, her cloak blowing out, pointing, crying to them—she saw the
Severn beneath. Or in a wood, making the kettle boil—very ineffective
with her fingers; the smoke curtseying, blowing in their faces; her little
pink face showing through; begging water from an old woman in a cot-
tage, who came to the door to watch them go. They walked always; the
others drove. She was bored driving, disliked all animals, except that
dog. They tramped miles along roads. She would break off to get her
bearings, pilot him back across country; and all the time they argued,
discussed poetry, discussed people, discussed politics (she was a Radical
then); never noticing a thing except when she stopped, cried out at a
view or a tree, and made him look with her; and so on again, through
stubble fields, she walking ahead, with a flower for her aunt, never tired
of walking for all her delicacy; to drop down on Bourton in the dusk.
Then, after dinner, old Breitkopf would open the piano and sing without
any voice, and they would lie sunk in arm-chairs, trying not to laugh, but
always breaking down and laughing, laughing—laughing at nothing.
Breitkopf was supposed not to see. And then in the morning, flirting up
and down like a wagtail in front of the house... .
Oh it was a letter from her! This blue envelope; that was her hand.
And he would have to read it. Here was another of those meetings,
bound to be painful! To read her letter needed the devil of an effort.
"How heavenly it was to see him. She must tell him that." That was all.
But it upset him. It annoyed him. He wished she hadn't written it.
Coming on top of his thoughts, it was like a nudge in the ribs. Why
couldn't she let him be? After all, she had married Dalloway, and lived
with him in perfect happiness all these years.
These hotels are not consoling places. Far from it. Any number of
people had hung up their hats on those pegs. Even the flies, if you
110
thought of it, had settled on other people's noses. As for the cleanliness
which hit him in the face, it wasn't cleanliness, so much as bareness, fri-
gidity; a thing that had to be. Some arid matron made her rounds at
dawn sniffing, peering, causing blue-nosed maids to scour, for all the
world as if the next visitor were a joint of meat to be served on a per-
fectly clean platter. For sleep, one bed; for sitting in, one armchair; for
cleaning one's teeth and shaving one's chin, one tumbler, one looking-
glass. Books, letters, dressing-gown, slipped about on the impersonality
of the horsehair like incongruous impertinences. And it was Clarissa's
letter that made him see all this. "Heavenly to see you. She must say so!"
He folded the paper; pushed it away; nothing would induce him to read
it again!
To get that letter to him by six o'clock she must have sat down and
written it directly he left her; stamped it; sent somebody to the post. It
was, as people say, very like her. She was upset by his visit. She had felt
a great deal; had for a moment, when she kissed his hand, regretted, en-
vied him even, remembered possibly (for he saw her look it) something
he had said—how they would change the world if she married him per-
haps; whereas, it was this; it was middle age; it was mediocrity; then
forced herself with her indomitable vitality to put all that aside, there be-
ing in her a thread of life which for toughness, endurance, power to
overcome obstacles, and carry her triumphantly through he had never
known the like of. Yes; but there would come a reaction directly he left
the room. She would be frightfully sorry for him; she would think what
in the world she could do to give him pleasure (short always of the one
thing) and he could see her with the tears running down her cheeks go-
ing to her writing-table and dashing off that one line which he was to
find greeting him... . "Heavenly to see you!" And she meant it.
Peter Walsh had now unlaced his boots.
But it would not have been a success, their marriage. The other thing,
after all, came so much more naturally.
It was odd; it was true; lots of people felt it. Peter Walsh, who had
done just respectably, filled the usual posts adequately, was liked, but
thought a little cranky, gave himself airs—it was odd that he should have
had, especially now that his hair was grey, a contented look; a look of
having reserves. It was this that made him attractive to women who
liked the sense that he was not altogether manly. There was something
unusual about him, or something behind him. It might be that he was
bookish—never came to see you without taking up the book on the table
(he was now reading, with his bootlaces trailing on the floor); or that he
111
was a gentleman, which showed itself in the way he knocked the ashes
out of his pipe, and in his manners of course to women. For it was very
charming and quite ridiculous how easily some girl without a grain of
sense could twist him round her finger. But at her own risk. That is to
say, though he might be ever so easy, and indeed with his gaiety and
good-breeding fascinating to be with, it was only up to a point. She said
something—no, no; he saw through that. He wouldn't stand that—no,
no. Then he could shout and rock and hold his sides together over some
joke with men. He was the best judge of cooking in India. He was a man.
But not the sort of man one had to respect—which was a mercy; not like
Major Simmons, for instance; not in the least like that, Daisy thought,
when, in spite of her two small children, she used to compare them.
He pulled off his boots. He emptied his pockets. Out came with his
pocket-knife a snapshot of Daisy on the verandah; Daisy all in white,
with a fox-terrier on her knee; very charming, very dark; the best he had
ever seen of her. It did come, after all so naturally; so much more natur-
ally than Clarissa. No fuss. No bother. No finicking and fidgeting. All
plain sailing. And the dark, adorably pretty girl on the verandah ex-
claimed (he could hear her). Of course, of course she would give him
everything! she cried (she had no sense of discretion) everything he
wanted! she cried, running to meet him, whoever might be looking. And
she was only twenty-four. And she had two children. Well, well!
Well indeed he had got himself into a mess at his age. And it came
over him when he woke in the night pretty forcibly. Suppose they did
marry? For him it would be all very well, but what about her? Mrs. Bur-
gess, a good sort and no chatterbox, in whom he had confided, thought
this absence of his in England, ostensibly to see lawyers might serve to
make Daisy reconsider, think what it meant. It was a question of her pos-
ition, Mrs. Burgess said; the social barrier; giving up her children. She'd
be a widow with a past one of these days, draggling about in the sub-
urbs, or more likely, indiscriminate (you know, she said, what such wo-
men get like, with too much paint). But Peter Walsh pooh-poohed all
that. He didn't mean to die yet. Anyhow she must settle for herself; judge
for herself, he thought, padding about the room in his socks, smoothing
out his dress-shirt, for he might go to Clarissa's party, or he might go to
one of the Halls, or he might settle in and read an absorbing book written
by a man he used to know at Oxford. And if he did retire, that's what
he'd do—write books. He would go to Oxford and poke about in the
Bodleian. Vainly the dark, adorably pretty girl ran to the end of the ter-
race; vainly waved her hand; vainly cried she didn't care a straw what
112
people said. There he was, the man she thought the world of, the perfect
gentleman, the fascinating, the distinguished (and his age made not the
least difference to her), padding about a room in an hotel in Bloomsbury,
shaving, washing, continuing, as he took up cans, put down razors, to
poke about in the Bodleian, and get at the truth about one or two little
matters that interested him. And he would have a chat with whoever it
might be, and so come to disregard more and more precise hours for
lunch, and miss engagements, and when Daisy asked him, as she would,
for a kiss, a scene, fail to come up to the scratch (though he was genu-
inely devoted to her)—in short it might be happier, as Mrs. Burgess said,
that she should forget him, or merely remember him as he was in
August 1922, like a figure standing at the cross roads at dusk, which
grows more and more remote as the dog-cart spins away, carrying her
securely fastened to the back seat, though her arms are outstretched, and
as she sees the figure dwindle and disappear still she cries out how she
would do anything in the world, anything, anything, anything... .
He never knew what people thought. It became more and more diffi-
cult for him to concentrate. He became absorbed; he became busied with
his own concerns; now surly, now gay; dependent on women, absent-
minded, moody, less and less able (so he thought as he shaved) to under-
stand why Clarissa couldn't simply find them a lodging and be nice to
Daisy; introduce her. And then he could just—just do what? just haunt
and hover (he was at the moment actually engaged in sorting out various
keys, papers), swoop and taste, be alone, in short, sufficient to himself;
and yet nobody of course was more dependent upon others (he buttoned
his waistcoat); it had been his undoing. He could not keep out of
smoking-rooms, liked colonels, liked golf, liked bridge, and above all
women's society, and the fineness of their companionship, and their
faithfulness and audacity and greatness in loving which though it had its
drawbacks seemed to him (and the dark, adorably pretty face was on top
of the envelopes) so wholly admirable, so splendid a flower to grow on
the crest of human life, and yet he could not come up to the scratch, be-
ing always apt to see round things (Clarissa had sapped something in
him permanently), and to tire very easily of mute devotion and to want
variety in love, though it would make him furious if Daisy loved any-
body else, furious! for he was jealous, uncontrollably jealous by tempera-
ment. He suffered tortures! But where was his knife; his watch; his seals,
his note-case, and Clarissa's letter which he would not read again but
liked to think of, and Daisy's photograph? And now for dinner.
They were eating.
113
Sitting at little tables round vases, dressed or not dressed, with their
shawls and bags laid beside them, with their air of false composure, for
they were not used to so many courses at dinner, and confidence, for
they were able to pay for it, and strain, for they had been running about
London all day shopping, sightseeing; and their natural curiosity, for
they looked round and up as the nice-looking gentleman in horn-
rimmed spectacles came in, and their good nature, for they would have
been glad to do any little service, such as lend a time-table or impart use-
ful information, and their desire, pulsing in them, tugging at them sub-
terraneously, somehow to establish connections if it were only a birth-
place (Liverpool, for example) in common or friends of the same name;
with their furtive glances, odd silences, and sudden withdrawals into
family jocularity and isolation; there they sat eating dinner when Mr.
Walsh came in and took his seat at a little table by the curtain.
It was not that he said anything, for being solitary he could only ad-
dress himself to the waiter; it was his way of looking at the menu, of
pointing his forefinger to a particular wine, of hitching himself up to the
table, of addressing himself seriously, not gluttonously to dinner, that
won him their respect; which, having to remain unexpressed for the
greater part of the meal, flared up at the table where the Morrises sat
when Mr. Walsh was heard to say at the end of the meal, "Bartlett pears."
Why he should have spoken so moderately yet firmly, with the air of a
disciplinarian well within his rights which are founded upon justice,
neither young Charles Morris, nor old Charles, neither Miss Elaine nor
Mrs. Morris knew. But when he said, "Bartlett pears," sitting alone at his
table, they felt that he counted on their support in some lawful demand;
was champion of a cause which immediately became their own, so that
their eyes met his eyes sympathetically, and when they all reached the
smoking-room simultaneously, a little talk between them became
inevitable.
It was not very profound—only to the effect that London was
crowded; had changed in thirty years; that Mr. Morris preferred Liver-
pool; that Mrs. Morris had been to the Westminster flower-show, and
that they had all seen the Prince of Wales. Yet, thought Peter Walsh, no
family in the world can compare with the Morrises; none whatever; and
their relations to each other are perfect, and they don't care a hang for
the upper classes, and they like what they like, and Elaine is training for
the family business, and the boy has won a scholarship at Leeds, and the
old lady (who is about his own age) has three more children at home;
and they have two motor cars, but Mr. Morris still mends the boots on
114
Sunday: it is superb, it is absolutely superb, thought Peter Walsh, sway-
ing a little backwards and forwards with his liqueur glass in his hand
among the hairy red chairs and ash-trays, feeling very well pleased with
himself, for the Morrises liked him. Yes, they liked a man who said,
"Bartlett pears." They liked him, he felt.
He would go to Clarissa's party. (The Morrises moved off; but they
would meet again.) He would go to Clarissa's party, because he wanted
to ask Richard what they were doing in India—the conservative duffers.
And what's being acted? And music... . Oh yes, and mere gossip.
For this is the truth about our soul, he thought, our self, who fish-like
inhabits deep seas and plies among obscurities threading her way
between the boles of giant weeds, over sun-flickered spaces and on and
on into gloom, cold, deep, inscrutable; suddenly she shoots to the surface
and sports on the wind-wrinkled waves; that is, has a positive need to
brush, scrape, kindle herself, gossiping. What did the Government
mean—Richard Dalloway would know—to do about India?
Since it was a very hot night and the paper boys went by with placards
proclaiming in huge red letters that there was a heat-wave, wicker chairs
were placed on the hotel steps and there, sipping, smoking, detached
gentlemen sat. Peter Walsh sat there. One might fancy that day, the Lon-
don day, was just beginning. Like a woman who had slipped off her
print dress and white apron to array herself in blue and pearls, the day
changed, put off stuff, took gauze, changed to evening, and with the
same sigh of exhilaration that a woman breathes, tumbling petticoats on
the floor, it too shed dust, heat, colour; the traffic thinned; motor cars,
tinkling, darting, succeeded the lumber of vans; and here and there
among the thick foliage of the squares an intense light hung. I resign, the
evening seemed to say, as it paled and faded above the battlements and
prominences, moulded, pointed, of hotel, flat, and block of shops, I fade,
she was beginning, I disappear, but London would have none of it, and
rushed her bayonets into the sky, pinioned her, constrained her to part-
nership in her revelry.
For the great revolution of Mr. Willett's summer time had taken place
since Peter Walsh's last visit to England. The prolonged evening was
new to him. It was inspiriting, rather. For as the young people went by
with their despatch-boxes, awfully glad to be free, proud too, dumbly, of
stepping this famous pavement, joy of a kind, cheap, tinselly, if you like,
but all the same rapture, flushed their faces. They dressed well too; pink
stockings; pretty shoes. They would now have two hours at the pictures.
It sharpened, it refined them, the yellow-blue evening light; and on the
115
leaves in the square shone lurid, livid—they looked as if dipped in sea
water—the foliage of a submerged city. He was astonished by the
beauty; it was encouraging too, for where the returned Anglo-Indian sat
by rights (he knew crowds of them) in the Oriental Club biliously sum-
ming up the ruin of the world, here was he, as young as ever; envying
young people their summer time and the rest of it, and more than sus-
pecting from the words of a girl, from a housemaid's
laughter—intangible things you couldn't lay your hands on—that shift in
the whole pyramidal accumulation which in his youth had seemed im-
movable. On top of them it had pressed; weighed them down, the wo-
men especially, like those flowers Clarissa's Aunt Helena used to press
between sheets of grey blotting-paper with Littré's dictionary on top, sit-
ting under the lamp after dinner. She was dead now. He had heard of
her, from Clarissa, losing the sight of one eye. It seemed so fitting—one
of nature's masterpieces—that old Miss Parry should turn to glass. She
would die like some bird in a frost gripping her perch. She belonged to a
different age, but being so entire, so complete, would always stand up on
the horizon, stone-white, eminent, like a lighthouse marking some past
stage on this adventurous, long, long voyage, this interminable (he felt
for a copper to buy a paper and read about Surrey and Yorkshire—he
had held out that copper millions of times. Surrey was all out once
more)—this interminable life. But cricket was no mere game. Cricket was
important. He could never help reading about cricket. He read the scores
in the stop press first, then how it was a hot day; then about a murder
case. Having done things millions of times enriched them, though it
might be said to take the surface off. The past enriched, and experience,
and having cared for one or two people, and so having acquired the
power which the young lack, of cutting short, doing what one likes, not
caring a rap what people say and coming and going without any very
great expectations (he left his paper on the table and moved off), which
however (and he looked for his hat and coat) was not altogether true of
him, not to-night, for here he was starting to go to a party, at his age,
with the belief upon him that he was about to have an experience. But
what?
Beauty anyhow. Not the crude beauty of the eye. It was not beauty
pure and simple—Bedford Place leading into Russell Square. It was
straightness and emptiness of course; the symmetry of a corridor; but it
was also windows lit up, a piano, a gramophone sounding; a sense of
pleasure-making hidden, but now and again emerging when, through
the uncurtained window, the window left open, one saw parties sitting
116
over tables, young people slowly circling, conversations between men
and women, maids idly looking out (a strange comment theirs, when
work was done), stockings drying on top ledges, a parrot, a few plants.
Absorbing, mysterious, of infinite richness, this life. And in the large
square where the cabs shot and swerved so quick, there were loitering
couples, dallying, embracing, shrunk up under the shower of a tree; that
was moving; so silent, so absorbed, that one passed, discreetly, timidly,
as if in the presence of some sacred ceremony to interrupt which would
have been impious. That was interesting. And so on into the flare and
glare.
His light overcoat blew open, he stepped with indescribable idiosyn-
crasy, lent a little forward, tripped, with his hands behind his back and
his eyes still a little hawklike; he tripped through London, towards West-
minster, observing.
Was everybody dining out, then? Doors were being opened here by a
footman to let issue a high-stepping old dame, in buckled shoes, with
three purple ostrich feathers in her hair. Doors were being opened for
ladies wrapped like mummies in shawls with bright flowers on them,
ladies with bare heads. And in respectable quarters with stucco pillars
through small front gardens lightly swathed with combs in their hair
(having run up to see the children), women came; men waited for them,
with their coats blowing open, and the motor started. Everybody was go-
ing out. What with these doors being opened, and the descent and the
start, it seemed as if the whole of London were embarking in little boats
moored to the bank, tossing on the waters, as if the whole place were
floating off in carnival. And Whitehall was skated over, silver beaten as
it was, skated over by spiders, and there was a sense of midges round
the arc lamps; it was so hot that people stood about talking. And here in
Westminster was a retired Judge, presumably, sitting four square at his
house door dressed all in white. An Anglo-Indian presumably.
And here a shindy of brawling women, drunken women; here only a
policeman and looming houses, high houses, domed houses, churches,
parliaments, and the hoot of a steamer on the river, a hollow misty cry.
But it was her street, this, Clarissa's; cabs were rushing round the corner,
like water round the piers of a bridge, drawn together, it seemed to him
because they bore people going to her party, Clarissa's party.
The cold stream of visual impressions failed him now as if the eye
were a cup that overflowed and let the rest run down its china walls un-
recorded. The brain must wake now. The body must contract now, enter-
ing the house, the lighted house, where the door stood open, where the
117
motor cars were standing, and bright women descending: the soul must
brave itself to endure. He opened the big blade of his pocket-knife.
Lucy came running full tilt downstairs, having just nipped in to the
drawing-room to smooth a cover, to straighten a chair, to pause a mo-
ment and feel whoever came in must think how clean, how bright, how
beautifully cared for, when they saw the beautiful silver, the brass fire-
irons, the new chair-covers, and the curtains of yellow chintz: she ap-
praised each; heard a roar of voices; people already coming up from din-
ner; she must fly!
The Prime Minister was coming, Agnes said: so she had heard them
say in the dining-room, she said, coming in with a tray of glasses. Did it
matter, did it matter in the least, one Prime Minister more or less? It
made no difference at this hour of the night to Mrs. Walker among the
plates, saucepans, cullenders, frying-pans, chicken in aspic, ice-cream
freezers, pared crusts of bread, lemons, soup tureens, and pudding
basins which, however hard they washed up in the scullery seemed to be
all on top of her, on the kitchen table, on chairs, while the fire blared and
roared, the electric lights glared, and still supper had to be laid. All she
felt was, one Prime Minister more or less made not a scrap of difference
to Mrs. Walker.
The ladies were going upstairs already, said Lucy; the ladies were go-
ing up, one by one, Mrs. Dalloway walking last and almost always send-
ing back some message to the kitchen, "My love to Mrs. Walker," that
was it one night. Next morning they would go over the dishes—the
soup, the salmon; the salmon, Mrs. Walker knew, as usual underdone,
for she always got nervous about the pudding and left it to Jenny; so it
happened, the salmon was always underdone. But some lady with fair
hair and silver ornaments had said, Lucy said, about the entrée, was it
really made at home? But it was the salmon that bothered Mrs. Walker,
as she spun the plates round and round, and pulled in dampers and
pulled out dampers; and there came a burst of laughter from the dining-
room; a voice speaking; then another burst of laughter—the gentlemen
enjoying themselves when the ladies had gone. The tokay, said Lucy
running in. Mr. Dalloway had sent for the tokay, from the Emperor's cel-
lars, the Imperial Tokay.
It was borne through the kitchen. Over her shoulder Lucy reported
how Miss Elizabeth looked quite lovely; she couldn't take her eyes off
her; in her pink dress, wearing the necklace Mr. Dalloway had given her.
Jenny must remember the dog, Miss Elizabeth's fox-terrier, which, since
118
it bit, had to be shut up and might, Elizabeth thought, want something.
Jenny must remember the dog. But Jenny was not going upstairs with all
those people about. There was a motor at the door already! There was a
ring at the bell—and the gentlemen still in the dining-room, drinking
tokay!
There, they were going upstairs; that was the first to come, and now
they would come faster and faster, so that Mrs. Parkinson (hired for
parties) would leave the hall door ajar, and the hall would be full of gen-
tlemen waiting (they stood waiting, sleeking down their hair) while the
ladies took their cloaks off in the room along the passage; where Mrs.
Barnet helped them, old Ellen Barnet, who had been with the family for
forty years, and came every summer to help the ladies, and remembered
mothers when they were girls, and though very unassuming did shake
hands; said "milady" very respectfully, yet had a humorous way with
her, looking at the young ladies, and ever so tactfully helping Lady
Lovejoy, who had some trouble with her underbodice. And they could
not help feeling, Lady Lovejoy and Miss Alice, that some little privilege
in the matter of brush and comb, was awarded them having known Mrs.
Barnet—"thirty years, milady," Mrs. Barnet supplied her. Young ladies
did not use to rouge, said Lady Lovejoy, when they stayed at Bourton in
the old days. And Miss Alice didn't need rouge, said Mrs. Barnet, look-
ing at her fondly. There Mrs. Barnet would sit, in the cloakroom, patting
down the furs, smoothing out the Spanish shawls, tidying the dressing-
table, and knowing perfectly well, in spite of the furs and the embroider-
ies, which were nice ladies, which were not. The dear old body, said
Lady Lovejoy, mounting the stairs, Clarissa's old nurse.
And then Lady Lovejoy stiffened. "Lady and Miss Lovejoy," she said to
Mr. Wilkins (hired for parties). He had an admirable manner, as he bent
and straightened himself, bent and straightened himself and announced
with perfect impartiality "Lady and Miss Lovejoy ... Sir John and Lady
Needham ... Miss Weld ... Mr. Walsh." His manner was admirable; his
family life must be irreproachable, except that it seemed impossible that
a being with greenish lips and shaven cheeks could ever have blundered
into the nuisance of children.
"How delightful to see you!" said Clarissa. She said it to every one.
How delightful to see you! She was at her worst—effusive, insincere. It
was a great mistake to have come. He should have stayed at home and
read his book, thought Peter Walsh; should have gone to a music hall; he
should have stayed at home, for he knew no one.
119
Oh dear, it was going to be a failure; a complete failure, Clarissa felt it
in her bones as dear old Lord Lexham stood there apologising for his
wife who had caught cold at the Buckingham Palace garden party. She
could see Peter out of the tail of her eye, criticising her, there, in that
corner. Why, after all, did she do these things? Why seek pinnacles and
stand drenched in fire? Might it consume her anyhow! Burn her to
cinders! Better anything, better brandish one's torch and hurl it to earth
than taper and dwindle away like some Ellie Henderson! It was ex-
traordinary how Peter put her into these states just by coming and stand-
ing in a corner. He made her see herself; exaggerate. It was idiotic. But
why did he come, then, merely to criticise? Why always take, never give?
Why not risk one's one little point of view? There he was wandering off,
and she must speak to him. But she would not get the chance. Life was
that—humiliation, renunciation. What Lord Lexham was saying was that
his wife would not wear her furs at the garden party because "my dear,
you ladies are all alike"—Lady Lexham being seventy-five at least! It was
delicious, how they petted each other, that old couple. She did like old
Lord Lexham. She did think it mattered, her party, and it made her feel
quite sick to know that it was all going wrong, all falling flat. Anything,
any explosion, any horror was better than people wandering aimlessly,
standing in a bunch at a corner like Ellie Henderson, not even caring to
hold themselves upright.
Gently the yellow curtain with all the birds of Paradise blew out and it
seemed as if there were a flight of wings into the room, right out, then
sucked back. (For the windows were open.) Was it draughty, Ellie
Henderson wondered? She was subject to chills. But it did not matter
that she should come down sneezing to-morrow; it was the girls with
their naked shoulders she thought of, being trained to think of others by
an old father, an invalid, late vicar of Bourton, but he was dead now; and
her chills never went to her chest, never. It was the girls she thought of,
the young girls with their bare shoulders, she herself having always been
a wisp of a creature, with her thin hair and meagre profile; though now,
past fifty, there was beginning to shine through some mild beam,
something purified into distinction by years of self-abnegation but ob-
scured again, perpetually, by her distressing gentility, her panic fear,
which arose from three hundred pounds' income, and her weaponless
state (she could not earn a penny) and it made her timid, and more and
more disqualified year by year to meet well-dressed people who did this
sort of thing every night of the season, merely telling their maids "I'll
wear so and so," whereas Ellie Henderson ran out nervously and bought
120
cheap pink flowers, half a dozen, and then threw a shawl over her old
black dress. For her invitation to Clarissa's party had come at the last
moment. She was not quite happy about it. She had a sort of feeling that
Clarissa had not meant to ask her this year.
Why should she? There was no reason really, except that they had al-
ways known each other. Indeed, they were cousins. But naturally they
had rather drifted apart, Clarissa being so sought after. It was an event to
her, going to a party. It was quite a treat just to see the lovely clothes.
Wasn't that Elizabeth, grown up, with her hair done in the fashionable
way, in the pink dress? Yet she could not be more than seventeen. She
was very, very handsome. But girls when they first came out didn't seem
to wear white as they used. (She must remember everything to tell
Edith.) Girls wore straight frocks, perfectly tight, with skirts well above
the ankles. It was not becoming, she thought.
So, with her weak eyesight, Ellie Henderson craned rather forward,
and it wasn't so much she who minded not having any one to talk to (she
hardly knew anybody there), for she felt that they were all such interest-
ing people to watch; politicians presumably; Richard Dalloway's friends;
but it was Richard himself who felt that he could not let the poor
creature go on standing there all the evening by herself.
"Well, Ellie, and how's the world treating you?" he said in his genial
way, and Ellie Henderson, getting nervous and flushing and feeling that
it was extraordinarily nice of him to come and talk to her, said that many
people really felt the heat more than the cold.
"Yes, they do," said Richard Dalloway. "Yes."
But what more did one say?
"Hullo, Richard," said somebody, taking him by the elbow, and, good
Lord, there was old Peter, old Peter Walsh. He was delighted to see
him—ever so pleased to see him! He hadn't changed a bit. And off they
went together walking right across the room, giving each other little
pats, as if they hadn't met for a long time, Ellie Henderson thought,
watching them go, certain she knew that man's face. A tall man, middle
aged, rather fine eyes, dark, wearing spectacles, with a look of John Bur-
rows. Edith would be sure to know.
The curtain with its flight of birds of Paradise blew out again. And
Clarissa saw—she saw Ralph Lyon beat it back, and go on talking. So it
wasn't a failure after all! it was going to be all right now—her party. It
had begun. It had started. But it was still touch and go. She must stand
there for the present. People seemed to come in a rush.
121
Colonel and Mrs. Garrod ... Mr. Hugh Whitbread ... Mr. Bowley ...
Mrs. Hilbery ... Lady Mary Maddox ... Mr. Quin ... intoned Wilkin. She
had six or seven words with each, and they went on, they went into the
rooms; into something now, not nothing, since Ralph Lyon had beat back
the curtain.
And yet for her own part, it was too much of an effort. She was not en-
joying it. It was too much like being—just anybody, standing there; any-
body could do it; yet this anybody she did a little admire, couldn't help
feeling that she had, anyhow, made this happen, that it marked a stage,
this post that she felt herself to have become, for oddly enough she had
quite forgotten what she looked like, but felt herself a stake driven in at
the top of her stairs. Every time she gave a party she had this feeling of
being something not herself, and that every one was unreal in one way;
much more real in another. It was, she thought, partly their clothes,
partly being taken out of their ordinary ways, partly the background, it
was possible to say things you couldn't say anyhow else, things that
needed an effort; possible to go much deeper. But not for her; not yet
anyhow.
"How delightful to see you!" she said. Dear old Sir Harry! He would
know every one.
And what was so odd about it was the sense one had as they came up
the stairs one after another, Mrs. Mount and Celia, Herbert Ainsty, Mrs.
Dakers—oh and Lady Bruton!
"How awfully good of you to come!" she said, and she meant it—it
was odd how standing there one felt them going on, going on, some
quite old, some ...
What name? Lady Rosseter? But who on earth was Lady Rosseter?
"Clarissa!" That voice! It was Sally Seton! Sally Seton! after all these
years! She loomed through a mist. For she hadn't looked like that, Sally
Seton, when Clarissa grasped the hot water can, to think of her under
this roof, under this roof! Not like that!
All on top of each other, embarrassed, laughing, words tumbled
out—passing through London; heard from Clara Haydon; what a chance
of seeing you! So I thrust myself in—without an invitation... .
One might put down the hot water can quite composedly. The lustre
had gone out of her. Yet it was extraordinary to see her again, older, hap-
pier, less lovely. They kissed each other, first this cheek then that, by the
drawing-room door, and Clarissa turned, with Sally's hand in hers, and
saw her rooms full, heard the roar of voices, saw the candlesticks, the
blowing curtains, and the roses which Richard had given her.
122
"I have five enormous boys," said Sally.
She had the simplest egotism, the most open desire to be thought first
always, and Clarissa loved her for being still like that. "I can't believe it!"
she cried, kindling all over with pleasure at the thought of the past.
But alas, Wilkins; Wilkins wanted her; Wilkins was emitting in a voice
of commanding authority as if the whole company must be admonished
and the hostess reclaimed from frivolity, one name:
"The Prime Minister," said Peter Walsh.
The Prime Minister? Was it really? Ellie Henderson marvelled. What a
thing to tell Edith!
One couldn't laugh at him. He looked so ordinary. You might have
stood him behind a counter and bought biscuits—poor chap, all rigged
up in gold lace. And to be fair, as he went his rounds, first with Clarissa
then with Richard escorting him, he did it very well. He tried to look
somebody. It was amusing to watch. Nobody looked at him. They just
went on talking, yet it was perfectly plain that they all knew, felt to the
marrow of their bones, this majesty passing; this symbol of what they all
stood for, English society. Old Lady Bruton, and she looked very fine
too, very stalwart in her lace, swam up, and they withdrew into a little
room which at once became spied upon, guarded, and a sort of stir and
rustle rippled through every one, openly: the Prime Minister!
Lord, lord, the snobbery of the English! thought Peter Walsh, standing
in the corner. How they loved dressing up in gold lace and doing
homage! There! That must be, by Jove it was, Hugh Whitbread, snuffing
round the precincts of the great, grown rather fatter, rather whiter, the
admirable Hugh!
He looked always as if he were on duty, thought Peter, a privileged,
but secretive being, hoarding secrets which he would die to defend,
though it was only some little piece of tittle-tattle dropped by a court
footman, which would be in all the papers tomorrow. Such were his
rattles, his baubles, in playing with which he had grown white, come to
the verge of old age, enjoying the respect and affection of all who had the
privilege of knowing this type of the English public school man. Inevit-
ably one made up things like that about Hugh; that was his style; the
style of those admirable letters which Peter had read thousands of miles
across the sea in the Times, and had thanked God he was out of that
pernicious hubble-bubble if it were only to hear baboons chatter and
coolies beat their wives. An olive-skinned youth from one of the
Universities stood obsequiously by. Him he would patronise, initiate,
teach how to get on. For he liked nothing better than doing kindnesses,
123
making the hearts of old ladies palpitate with the joy of being thought of
in their age, their affliction, thinking themselves quite forgotten, yet here
was dear Hugh driving up and spending an hour talking of the past, re-
membering trifles, praising the home-made cake, though Hugh might
eat cake with a Duchess any day of his life, and, to look at him, probably
did spend a good deal of time in that agreeable occupation. The All-
judging, the All-merciful, might excuse. Peter Walsh had no mercy. Vil-
lains there must be, and God knows the rascals who get hanged for bat-
tering the brains of a girl out in a train do less harm on the whole than
Hugh Whitbread and his kindness. Look at him now, on tiptoe, dancing
forward, bowing and scraping, as the Prime Minister and Lady Bruton
emerged, intimating for all the world to see that he was privileged to say
something, something private, to Lady Bruton as she passed. She
stopped. She wagged her fine old head. She was thanking him presum-
ably for some piece of servility. She had her toadies, minor officials in
Government offices who ran about putting through little jobs on her be-
half, in return for which she gave them luncheon. But she derived from
the eighteenth century. She was all right.
And now Clarissa escorted her Prime Minister down the room, pran-
cing, sparkling, with the stateliness of her grey hair. She wore ear-rings,
and a silver-green mermaid's dress. Lolloping on the waves and braiding
her tresses she seemed, having that gift still; to be; to exist; to sum it all
up in the moment as she passed; turned, caught her scarf in some other
woman's dress, unhitched it, laughed, all with the most perfect ease and
air of a creature floating in its element. But age had brushed her; even as
a mermaid might behold in her glass the setting sun on some very clear
evening over the waves. There was a breath of tenderness; her severity,
her prudery, her woodenness were all warmed through now, and she
had about her as she said good-bye to the thick gold-laced man who was
doing his best, and good luck to him, to look important, an inexpressible
dignity; an exquisite cordiality; as if she wished the whole world well,
and must now, being on the very verge and rim of things, take her leave.
So she made him think. (But he was not in love.)
Indeed, Clarissa felt, the Prime Minister had been good to come. And,
walking down the room with him, with Sally there and Peter there and
Richard very pleased, with all those people rather inclined, perhaps, to
envy, she had felt that intoxication of the moment, that dilatation of the
nerves of the heart itself till it seemed to quiver, steeped, upright;—yes,
but after all it was what other people felt, that; for, though she loved it
and felt it tingle and sting, still these semblances, these triumphs (dear
124
old Peter, for example, thinking her so brilliant), had a hollowness; at
arm's length they were, not in the heart; and it might be that she was
growing old but they satisfied her no longer as they used; and suddenly,
as she saw the Prime Minister go down the stairs, the gilt rim of the Sir
Joshua picture of the little girl with a muff brought back Kilman with a
rush; Kilman her enemy. That was satisfying; that was real. Ah, how she
hated her—hot, hypocritical, corrupt; with all that power; Elizabeth's se-
ducer; the woman who had crept in to steal and defile (Richard would
say, What nonsense!). She hated her: she loved her. It was enemies one
wanted, not friends—not Mrs. Durrant and Clara, Sir William and Lady
Bradshaw, Miss Truelock and Eleanor Gibson (whom she saw coming
upstairs). They must find her if they wanted her. She was for the party!
There was her old friend Sir Harry.
"Dear Sir Harry!" she said, going up to the fine old fellow who had
produced more bad pictures than any other two Academicians in the
whole of St. John's Wood (they were always of cattle, standing in sunset
pools absorbing moisture, or signifying, for he had a certain range of ges-
ture, by the raising of one foreleg and the toss of the antlers, "the Ap-
proach of the Stranger"—all his activities, dining out, racing, were foun-
ded on cattle standing absorbing moisture in sunset pools).
"What are you laughing at?" she asked him. For Willie Titcomb and Sir
Harry and Herbert Ainsty were all laughing. But no. Sir Harry could not
tell Clarissa Dalloway (much though he liked her; of her type he thought
her perfect, and threatened to paint her) his stories of the music hall
stage. He chaffed her about her party. He missed his brandy. These
circles, he said, were above him. But he liked her; respected her, in spite
of her damnable, difficult upper-class refinement, which made it im-
possible to ask Clarissa Dalloway to sit on his knee. And up came that
wandering will-o'-the-wisp, that vagulous phosphorescence, old Mrs.
Hilbery, stretching her hands to the blaze of his laughter (about the Duke
and the Lady), which, as she heard it across the room, seemed to reas-
sure her on a point which sometimes bothered her if she woke early in
the morning and did not like to call her maid for a cup of tea; how it is
certain we must die.
"They won't tell us their stories," said Clarissa.
"Dear Clarissa!" exclaimed Mrs. Hilbery. She looked to-night, she said,
so like her mother as she first saw her walking in a garden in a grey hat.
And really Clarissa's eyes filled with tears. Her mother, walking in a
garden! But alas, she must go.
125
For there was Professor Brierly, who lectured on Milton, talking to
little Jim Hutton (who was unable even for a party like this to compass
both tie and waistcoat or make his hair lie flat), and even at this distance
they were quarrelling, she could see. For Professor Brierly was a very
queer fish. With all those degrees, honours, lectureships between him
and the scribblers he suspected instantly an atmosphere not favourable
to his queer compound; his prodigious learning and timidity; his wintry
charm without cordiality; his innocence blent with snobbery; he
quivered if made conscious by a lady's unkempt hair, a youth's boots, of
an underworld, very creditable doubtless, of rebels, of ardent young
people; of would-be geniuses, and intimated with a little toss of the head,
with a sniff—Humph!—the value of moderation; of some slight training
in the classics in order to appreciate Milton. Professor Brierly (Clarissa
could see) wasn't hitting it off with little Jim Hutton (who wore red
socks, his black being at the laundry) about Milton. She interrupted.
She said she loved Bach. So did Hutton. That was the bond between
them, and Hutton (a very bad poet) always felt that Mrs. Dalloway was
far the best of the great ladies who took an interest in art. It was odd how
strict she was. About music she was purely impersonal. She was rather a
prig. But how charming to look at! She made her house so nice if it
weren't for her Professors. Clarissa had half a mind to snatch him off and
set him down at the piano in the back room. For he played divinely.
"But the noise!" she said. "The noise!"
"The sign of a successful party." Nodding urbanely, the Professor
stepped delicately off.
"He knows everything in the whole world about Milton," said Clarissa.
"Does he indeed?" said Hutton, who would imitate the Professor
throughout Hampstead; the Professor on Milton; the Professor on mod-
eration; the Professor stepping delicately off.
But she must speak to that couple, said Clarissa, Lord Gayton and
Nancy Blow.
Not that they added perceptibly to the noise of the party. They were
not talking (perceptibly) as they stood side by side by the yellow cur-
tains. They would soon be off elsewhere, together; and never had very
much to say in any circumstances. They looked; that was all. That was
enough. They looked so clean, so sound, she with an apricot bloom of
powder and paint, but he scrubbed, rinsed, with the eyes of a bird, so
that no ball could pass him or stroke surprise him. He struck, he leapt,
accurately, on the spot. Ponies' mouths quivered at the end of his reins.
He had his honours, ancestral monuments, banners hanging in the
126
church at home. He had his duties; his tenants; a mother and sisters; had
been all day at Lords, and that was what they were talking
about—cricket, cousins, the movies—when Mrs. Dalloway came up.
Lord Gayton liked her most awfully. So did Miss Blow. She had such
charming manners.
"It is angelic—it is delicious of you to have come!" she said. She loved
Lords; she loved youth, and Nancy, dressed at enormous expense by the
greatest artists in Paris, stood there looking as if her body had merely
put forth, of its own accord, a green frill.
"I had meant to have dancing," said Clarissa.
For the young people could not talk. And why should they? Shout,
embrace, swing, be up at dawn; carry sugar to ponies; kiss and caress the
snouts of adorable chows; and then all tingling and streaming, plunge
and swim. But the enormous resources of the English language, the
power it bestows, after all, of communicating feelings (at their age, she
and Peter would have been arguing all the evening), was not for them.
They would solidify young. They would be good beyond measure to the
people on the estate, but alone, perhaps, rather dull.
"What a pity!" she said. "I had hoped to have dancing."
It was so extraordinarily nice of them to have come! But talk of dan-
cing! The rooms were packed.
There was old Aunt Helena in her shawl. Alas, she must leave
them—Lord Gayton and Nancy Blow. There was old Miss Parry, her
aunt.
For Miss Helena Parry was not dead: Miss Parry was alive. She was
past eighty. She ascended staircases slowly with a stick. She was placed
in a chair (Richard had seen to it). People who had known Burma in the
'seventies were always led up to her. Where had Peter got to? They used
to be such friends. For at the mention of India, or even Ceylon, her eyes
(only one was glass) slowly deepened, became blue, beheld, not human
beings—she had no tender memories, no proud illusions about Viceroys,
Generals, Mutinies—it was orchids she saw, and mountain passes and
herself carried on the backs of coolies in the 'sixties over solitary peaks;
or descending to uproot orchids (startling blossoms, never beheld be-
fore) which she painted in water-colour; an indomitable Englishwoman,
fretful if disturbed by the War, say, which dropped a bomb at her very
door, from her deep meditation over orchids and her own figure jour-
neying in the 'sixties in India—but here was Peter.
"Come and talk to Aunt Helena about Burma," said Clarissa.
And yet he had not had a word with her all the evening!
127
"We will talk later," said Clarissa, leading him up to Aunt Helena, in
her white shawl, with her stick.
"Peter Walsh," said Clarissa.
That meant nothing.
Clarissa had asked her. It was tiring; it was noisy; but Clarissa had
asked her. So she had come. It was a pity that they lived in Lon-
don—Richard and Clarissa. If only for Clarissa's health it would have
been better to live in the country. But Clarissa had always been fond of
society.
"He has been in Burma," said Clarissa.
Ah. She could not resist recalling what Charles Darwin had said about
her little book on the orchids of Burma.
(Clarissa must speak to Lady Bruton.)
No doubt it was forgotten now, her book on the orchids of Burma, but
it went into three editions before 1870, she told Peter. She remembered
him now. He had been at Bourton (and he had left her, Peter Walsh re-
membered, without a word in the drawing-room that night when
Clarissa had asked him to come boating).
"Richard so much enjoyed his lunch party," said Clarissa to Lady
Bruton.
"Richard was the greatest possible help," Lady Bruton replied. "He
helped me to write a letter. And how are you?"
"Oh, perfectly well!" said Clarissa. (Lady Bruton detested illness in the
wives of politicians.)
"And there's Peter Walsh!" said Lady Bruton (for she could never think
of anything to say to Clarissa; though she liked her. She had lots of fine
qualities; but they had nothing in common—she and Clarissa. It might
have been better if Richard had married a woman with less charm, who
would have helped him more in his work. He had lost his chance of the
Cabinet). "There's Peter Walsh!" she said, shaking hands with that agree-
able sinner, that very able fellow who should have made a name for him-
self but hadn't (always in difficulties with women), and, of course, old
Miss Parry. Wonderful old lady!
Lady Bruton stood by Miss Parry's chair, a spectral grenadier, draped
in black, inviting Peter Walsh to lunch; cordial; but without small talk,
remembering nothing whatever about the flora or fauna of India. She
had been there, of course; had stayed with three Viceroys; thought some
of the Indian civilians uncommonly fine fellows; but what a tragedy it
was—the state of India! The Prime Minister had just been telling her (old
Miss Parry huddled up in her shawl, did not care what the Prime
128
Minister had just been telling her), and Lady Bruton would like to have
Peter Walsh's opinion, he being fresh from the centre, and she would get
Sir Sampson to meet him, for really it prevented her from sleeping at
night, the folly of it, the wickedness she might say, being a soldier's
daughter. She was an old woman now, not good for much. But her
house, her servants, her good friend Milly Brush—did he remember
her?—were all there only asking to be used if—if they could be of help,
in short. For she never spoke of England, but this isle of men, this dear,
dear land, was in her blood (without reading Shakespeare), and if ever a
woman could have worn the helmet and shot the arrow, could have led
troops to attack, ruled with indomitable justice barbarian hordes and lain
under a shield noseless in a church, or made a green grass mound on
some primeval hillside, that woman was Millicent Bruton. Debarred by
her sex and some truancy, too, of the logical faculty (she found it im-
possible to write a letter to the Times), she had the thought of Empire al-
ways at hand, and had acquired from her association with that armoured
goddess her ramrod bearing, her robustness of demeanour, so that one
could not figure her even in death parted from the earth or roaming ter-
ritories over which, in some spiritual shape, the Union Jack had ceased to
fly. To be not English even among the dead—no, no! Impossible!
But was it Lady Bruton (whom she used to know)? Was it Peter Walsh
grown grey? Lady Rosseter asked herself (who had been Sally Seton). It
was old Miss Parry certainly—the old aunt who used to be so cross when
she stayed at Bourton. Never should she forget running along the pas-
sage naked, and being sent for by Miss Parry! And Clarissa! oh Clarissa!
Sally caught her by the arm.
Clarissa stopped beside them.
"But I can't stay," she said. "I shall come later. Wait," she said, looking
at Peter and Sally. They must wait, she meant, until all these people had
gone.
"I shall come back," she said, looking at her old friends, Sally and
Peter, who were shaking hands, and Sally, remembering the past no
doubt, was laughing.
But her voice was wrung of its old ravishing richness; her eyes not
aglow as they used to be, when she smoked cigars, when she ran down
the passage to fetch her sponge bag, without a stitch of clothing on her,
and Ellen Atkins asked, What if the gentlemen had met her? But every-
body forgave her. She stole a chicken from the larder because she was
hungry in the night; she smoked cigars in her bedroom; she left a price-
less book in the punt. But everybody adored her (except perhaps Papa).
129
It was her warmth; her vitality—she would paint, she would write. Old
women in the village never to this day forgot to ask after "your friend in
the red cloak who seemed so bright." She accused Hugh Whitbread, of
all people (and there he was, her old friend Hugh, talking to the Por-
tuguese Ambassador), of kissing her in the smoking-room to punish her
for saying that women should have votes. Vulgar men did, she said. And
Clarissa remembered having to persuade her not to denounce him at
family prayers—which she was capable of doing with her daring, her
recklessness, her melodramatic love of being the centre of everything
and creating scenes, and it was bound, Clarissa used to think, to end in
some awful tragedy; her death; her martyrdom; instead of which she had
married, quite unexpectedly, a bald man with a large buttonhole who
owned, it was said, cotton mills at Manchester. And she had five boys!
She and Peter had settled down together. They were talking: it seemed
so familiar—that they should be talking. They would discuss the past.
With the two of them (more even than with Richard) she shared her past;
the garden; the trees; old Joseph Breitkopf singing Brahms without any
voice; the drawing-room wallpaper; the smell of the mats. A part of this
Sally must always be; Peter must always be. But she must leave them.
There were the Bradshaws, whom she disliked. She must go up to Lady
Bradshaw (in grey and silver, balancing like a sea-lion at the edge of its
tank, barking for invitations, Duchesses, the typical successful man's
wife), she must go up to Lady Bradshaw and say ...
But Lady Bradshaw anticipated her.
"We are shockingly late, dear Mrs. Dalloway, we hardly dared to come
in," she said.
And Sir William, who looked very distinguished, with his grey hair
and blue eyes, said yes; they had not been able to resist the temptation.
He was talking to Richard about that Bill probably, which they wanted
to get through the Commons. Why did the sight of him, talking to
Richard, curl her up? He looked what he was, a great doctor. A man ab-
solutely at the head of his profession, very powerful, rather worn. For
think what cases came before him—people in the uttermost depths of
misery; people on the verge of insanity; husbands and wives. He had to
decide questions of appalling difficulty. Yet—what she felt was, one
wouldn't like Sir William to see one unhappy. No; not that man.
"How is your son at Eton?" she asked Lady Bradshaw.
He had just missed his eleven, said Lady Bradshaw, because of the
mumps. His father minded even more than he did, she thought "being,"
she said, "nothing but a great boy himself."
130
Clarissa looked at Sir William, talking to Richard. He did not look like
a boy—not in the least like a boy. She had once gone with some one to
ask his advice. He had been perfectly right; extremely sensible. But
Heavens—what a relief to get out to the street again! There was some
poor wretch sobbing, she remembered, in the waiting-room. But she did
not know what it was—about Sir William; what exactly she disliked.
Only Richard agreed with her, "didn't like his taste, didn't like his smell."
But he was extraordinarily able. They were talking about this Bill. Some
case, Sir William was mentioning, lowering his voice. It had its bearing
upon what he was saying about the deferred effects of shell shock. There
must be some provision in the Bill.
Sinking her voice, drawing Mrs. Dalloway into the shelter of a com-
mon femininity, a common pride in the illustrious qualities of husbands
and their sad tendency to overwork, Lady Bradshaw (poor goose—one
didn't dislike her) murmured how, "just as we were starting, my hus-
band was called up on the telephone, a very sad case. A young man (that
is what Sir William is telling Mr. Dalloway) had killed himself. He had
been in the army." Oh! thought Clarissa, in the middle of my party,
here's death, she thought.
She went on, into the little room where the Prime Minister had gone
with Lady Bruton. Perhaps there was somebody there. But there was
nobody. The chairs still kept the impress of the Prime Minister and Lady
Bruton, she turned deferentially, he sitting four-square, authoritatively.
They had been talking about India. There was nobody. The party's
splendour fell to the floor, so strange it was to come in alone in her
finery.
What business had the Bradshaws to talk of death at her party? A
young man had killed himself. And they talked of it at her party—the
Bradshaws, talked of death. He had killed himself—but how? Always
her body went through it first, when she was told, suddenly, of an acci-
dent; her dress flamed, her body burnt. He had thrown himself from a
window. Up had flashed the ground; through him, blundering, bruising,
went the rusty spikes. There he lay with a thud, thud, thud in his brain,
and then a suffocation of blackness. So she saw it. But why had he done
it? And the Bradshaws talked of it at her party!
She had once thrown a shilling into the Serpentine, never anything
more. But he had flung it away. They went on living (she would have to
go back; the rooms were still crowded; people kept on coming). They (all
day she had been thinking of Bourton, of Peter, of Sally), they would
grow old. A thing there was that mattered; a thing, wreathed about with
131
chatter, defaced, obscured in her own life, let drop every day in corrup-
tion, lies, chatter. This he had preserved. Death was defiance. Death was
an attempt to communicate; people feeling the impossibility of reaching
the centre which, mystically, evaded them; closeness drew apart; rapture
faded, one was alone. There was an embrace in death.
But this young man who had killed himself—had he plunged holding
his treasure? "If it were now to die, 'twere now to be most happy," she
had said to herself once, coming down in white.
Or there were the poets and thinkers. Suppose he had had that pas-
sion, and had gone to Sir William Bradshaw, a great doctor yet to her ob-
scurely evil, without sex or lust, extremely polite to women, but capable
of some indescribable outrage—forcing your soul, that was it—if this
young man had gone to him, and Sir William had impressed him, like
that, with his power, might he not then have said (indeed she felt it
now), Life is made intolerable; they make life intolerable, men like that?
Then (she had felt it only this morning) there was the terror; the over-
whelming incapacity, one's parents giving it into one's hands, this life, to
be lived to the end, to be walked with serenely; there was in the depths
of her heart an awful fear. Even now, quite often if Richard had not been
there reading the Times, so that she could crouch like a bird and gradu-
ally revive, send roaring up that immeasurable delight, rubbing stick to
stick, one thing with another, she must have perished. But that young
man had killed himself.
Somehow it was her disaster—her disgrace. It was her punishment to
see sink and disappear here a man, there a woman, in this profound
darkness, and she forced to stand here in her evening dress. She had
schemed; she had pilfered. She was never wholly admirable. She had
wanted success. Lady Bexborough and the rest of it. And once she had
walked on the terrace at Bourton.
It was due to Richard; she had never been so happy. Nothing could be
slow enough; nothing last too long. No pleasure could equal, she
thought, straightening the chairs, pushing in one book on the shelf, this
having done with the triumphs of youth, lost herself in the process of liv-
ing, to find it, with a shock of delight, as the sun rose, as the day sank.
Many a time had she gone, at Bourton when they were all talking, to
look at the sky; or seen it between people's shoulders at dinner; seen it in
London when she could not sleep. She walked to the window.
It held, foolish as the idea was, something of her own in it, this country
sky, this sky above Westminster. She parted the curtains; she looked. Oh,
but how surprising!—in the room opposite the old lady stared straight at
132
her! She was going to bed. And the sky. It will be a solemn sky, she had
thought, it will be a dusky sky, turning away its cheek in beauty. But
there it was—ashen pale, raced over quickly by tapering vast clouds. It
was new to her. The wind must have risen. She was going to bed, in the
room opposite. It was fascinating to watch her, moving about, that old
lady, crossing the room, coming to the window. Could she see her? It
was fascinating, with people still laughing and shouting in the drawing-
room, to watch that old woman, quite quietly, going to bed. She pulled
the blind now. The clock began striking. The young man had killed him-
self; but she did not pity him; with the clock striking the hour, one, two,
three, she did not pity him, with all this going on. There! the old lady
had put out her light! the whole house was dark now with this going on,
she repeated, and the words came to her, Fear no more the heat of the
sun. She must go back to them. But what an extraordinary night! She felt
somehow very like him—the young man who had killed himself. She felt
glad that he had done it; thrown it away. The clock was striking. The
leaden circles dissolved in the air. He made her feel the beauty; made her
feel the fun. But she must go back. She must assemble. She must find
Sally and Peter. And she came in from the little room.
"But where is Clarissa?" said Peter. He was sitting on the sofa with
Sally. (After all these years he really could not call her "Lady Rosseter.")
"Where's the woman gone to?" he asked. "Where's Clarissa?"
Sally supposed, and so did Peter for the matter of that, that there were
people of importance, politicians, whom neither of them knew unless by
sight in the picture papers, whom Clarissa had to be nice to, had to talk
to. She was with them. Yet there was Richard Dalloway not in the Cabin-
et. He hadn't been a success, Sally supposed? For herself, she scarcely
ever read the papers. She sometimes saw his name mentioned. But
then—well, she lived a very solitary life, in the wilds, Clarissa would
say, among great merchants, great manufacturers, men, after all, who
did things. She had done things too!
"I have five sons!" she told him.
Lord, Lord, what a change had come over her! the softness of mother-
hood; its egotism too. Last time they met, Peter remembered, had been
among the cauliflowers in the moonlight, the leaves "like rough bronze"
she had said, with her literary turn; and she had picked a rose. She had
marched him up and down that awful night, after the scene by the foun-
tain; he was to catch the midnight train. Heavens, he had wept!
That was his old trick, opening a pocket-knife, thought Sally, always
opening and shutting a knife when he got excited. They had been very,
very intimate, she and Peter Walsh, when he was in love with Clarissa,
and there was that dreadful, ridiculous scene over Richard Dalloway at
lunch. She had called Richard "Wickham." Why not call Richard
"Wickham"? Clarissa had flared up! and indeed they had never seen each
other since, she and Clarissa, not more than half a dozen times perhaps
in the last ten years. And Peter Walsh had gone off to India, and she had
heard vaguely that he had made an unhappy marriage, and she didn't
know whether he had any children, and she couldn't ask him, for he had
changed. He was rather shrivelled-looking, but kinder, she felt, and she
had a real affection for him, for he was connected with her youth, and
she still had a little Emily Brontë he had given her, and he was to write,
surely? In those days he was to write.
"Have you written?" she asked him, spreading her hand, her firm and
shapely hand, on her knee in a way he recalled.
"Not a word!" said Peter Walsh, and she laughed.
She was still attractive, still a personage, Sally Seton. But who was this
Rosseter? He wore two camellias on his wedding day—that was all Peter
knew of him. "They have myriads of servants, miles of conservatories,"
Clarissa wrote; something like that. Sally owned it with a shout of
laughter.
"Yes, I have ten thousand a year"—whether before the tax was paid or
after, she couldn't remember, for her husband, "whom you must meet,"
she said, "whom you would like," she said, did all that for her.
And Sally used to be in rags and tatters. She had pawned her
grandmother's ring which Marie Antoinette had given her great-grand-
father to come to Bourton.
Oh yes, Sally remembered; she had it still, a ruby ring which Marie
Antoinette had given her great-grandfather. She never had a penny to
her name in those days, and going to Bourton always meant some fright-
ful pinch. But going to Bourton had meant so much to her—had kept her
sane, she believed, so unhappy had she been at home. But that was all a
thing of the past—all over now, she said. And Mr. Parry was dead; and
Miss Parry was still alive. Never had he had such a shock in his life! said
Peter. He had been quite certain she was dead. And the marriage had
been, Sally supposed, a success? And that very handsome, very self-pos-
sessed young woman was Elizabeth, over there, by the curtains, in red.
(She was like a poplar, she was like a river, she was like a hyacinth,
Willie Titcomb was thinking. Oh how much nicer to be in the country
and do what she liked! She could hear her poor dog howling, Elizabeth
was certain.) She was not a bit like Clarissa, Peter Walsh said.
"Oh, Clarissa!" said Sally.
What Sally felt was simply this. She had owed Clarissa an enormous
amount. They had been friends, not acquaintances, friends, and she still
saw Clarissa all in white going about the house with her hands full of
flowers—to this day tobacco plants made her think of Bourton. But—did
Peter understand?—she lacked something. Lacked what was it? She had
charm; she had extraordinary charm. But to be frank (and she felt that
Peter was an old friend, a real friend—did absence matter? did distance
matter? She had often wanted to write to him, but torn it up, yet felt he
understood, for people understand without things being said, as one
realises growing old, and old she was, had been that afternoon to see her
sons at Eton, where they had the mumps), to be quite frank then, how
could Clarissa have done it?—married Richard Dalloway? a sportsman, a
man who cared only for dogs. Literally, when he came into the room he
smelt of the stables. And then all this? She waved her hand.
Hugh Whitbread it was, strolling past in his white waistcoat, dim, fat,
blind, past everything he looked, except self-esteem and comfort.
"He's not going to recognise us," said Sally, and really she hadn't the
courage—so that was Hugh! the admirable Hugh!
"And what does he do?" she asked Peter.
He blacked the King's boots or counted bottles at Windsor, Peter told
her. Peter kept his sharp tongue still! But Sally must be frank, Peter said.
That kiss now, Hugh's.
On the lips, she assured him, in the smoking-room one evening. She
went straight to Clarissa in a rage. Hugh didn't do such things! Clarissa
said, the admirable Hugh! Hugh's socks were without exception the
most beautiful she had ever seen—and now his evening dress. Perfect!
And had he children?
"Everybody in the room has six sons at Eton," Peter told her, except
himself. He, thank God, had none. No sons, no daughters, no wife. Well,
he didn't seem to mind, said Sally. He looked younger, she thought, than
any of them.
But it had been a silly thing to do, in many ways, Peter said, to marry
like that; "a perfect goose she was," he said, but, he said, "we had a splen-
did time of it," but how could that be? Sally wondered; what did he
mean? and how odd it was to know him and yet not know a single thing
that had happened to him. And did he say it out of pride? Very likely,
for after all it must be galling for him (though he was an oddity, a sort of
sprite, not at all an ordinary man), it must be lonely at his age to have no
home, nowhere to go to. But he must stay with them for weeks and
weeks. Of course he would; he would love to stay with them, and that
was how it came out. All these years the Dalloways had never been once.
Time after time they had asked them. Clarissa (for it was Clarissa of
course) would not come. For, said Sally, Clarissa was at heart a
snob—one had to admit it, a snob. And it was that that was between
them, she was convinced. Clarissa thought she had married beneath her,
her husband being—she was proud of it—a miner's son. Every penny
they had he had earned. As a little boy (her voice trembled) he had car-
ried great sacks.
(And so she would go on, Peter felt, hour after hour; the miner's son;
people thought she had married beneath her; her five sons; and what
was the other thing—plants, hydrangeas, syringas, very, very rare hibis-
cus lilies that never grow north of the Suez Canal, but she, with one
gardener in a suburb near Manchester, had beds of them, positively
beds! Now all that Clarissa had escaped, unmaternal as she was.)
A snob was she? Yes, in many ways. Where was she, all this time? It
was getting late.
"Yet," said Sally, "when I heard Clarissa was giving a party, I felt I
couldn't not come—must see her again (and I'm staying in Victoria
Street, practically next door). So I just came without an invitation. But,"
she whispered, "tell me, do. Who is this?"
It was Mrs. Hilbery, looking for the door. For how late it was getting!
And, she murmured, as the night grew later, as people went, one found
old friends; quiet nooks and corners; and the loveliest views. Did they
know, she asked, that they were surrounded by an enchanted garden?
Lights and trees and wonderful gleaming lakes and the sky. Just a few
fairy lamps, Clarissa Dalloway had said, in the back garden! But she was
a magician! It was a park... . And she didn't know their names, but
friends she knew they were, friends without names, songs without
words, always the best. But there were so many doors, such unexpected
places, she could not find her way.
"Old Mrs. Hilbery," said Peter; but who was that? that lady standing
by the curtain all the evening, without speaking? He knew her face; con-
nected her with Bourton. Surely she used to cut up underclothes at the
large table in the window? Davidson, was that her name?
"Oh, that is Ellie Henderson," said Sally. Clarissa was really very hard
on her. She was a cousin, very poor. Clarissa was hard on people.
She was rather, said Peter. Yet, said Sally, in her emotional way, with a
rush of that enthusiasm which Peter used to love her for, yet dreaded a
little now, so effusive she might become—how generous to her friends
Clarissa was! and what a rare quality one found it, and how sometimes
at night or on Christmas Day, when she counted up her blessings, she
put that friendship first. They were young; that was it. Clarissa was
pure-hearted; that was it. Peter would think her sentimental. So she was.
For she had come to feel that it was the only thing worth saying—what
one felt. Cleverness was silly. One must say simply what one felt.
"But I do not know," said Peter Walsh, "what I feel."
Poor Peter, thought Sally. Why did not Clarissa come and talk to
them? That was what he was longing for. She knew it. All the time he
was thinking only of Clarissa, and was fidgeting with his knife.
He had not found life simple, Peter said. His relations with Clarissa
had not been simple. It had spoilt his life, he said. (They had been so in-
timate—he and Sally Seton, it was absurd not to say it.) One could not be
in love twice, he said. And what could she say? Still, it is better to have
loved (but he would think her sentimental—he used to be so sharp). He
must come and stay with them in Manchester. That is all very true, he
said. All very true. He would love to come and stay with them, directly
he had done what he had to do in London.
And Clarissa had cared for him more than she had ever cared for
Richard. Sally was positive of that.
"No, no, no!" said Peter (Sally should not have said that—she went too
far). That good fellow—there he was at the end of the room, holding
forth, the same as ever, dear old Richard. Who was he talking to? Sally
asked, that very distinguished-looking man? Living in the wilds as she
did, she had an insatiable curiosity to know who people were. But Peter
did not know. He did not like his looks, he said, probably a Cabinet Min-
ister. Of them all, Richard seemed to him the best, he said—the most disinterested.
"But what has he done?" Sally asked. Public work, she supposed. And
were they happy together? Sally asked (she herself was extremely
happy); for, she admitted, she knew nothing about them, only jumped to
conclusions, as one does, for what can one know even of the people one
lives with every day? she asked. Are we not all prisoners? She had read a
wonderful play about a man who scratched on the wall of his cell, and
she had felt that was true of life—one scratched on the wall. Despairing
of human relationships (people were so difficult), she often went into her
garden and got from her flowers a peace which men and women never
gave her. But no; he did not like cabbages; he preferred human beings,
Peter said. Indeed, the young are beautiful, Sally said, watching Eliza-
beth cross the room. How unlike Clarissa at her age! Could he make
anything of her? She would not open her lips. Not much, not yet, Peter
admitted. She was like a lily, Sally said, a lily by the side of a pool. But
Peter did not agree that we know nothing. We know everything, he said;
at least he did.
But these two, Sally whispered, these two coming now (and really she
must go, if Clarissa did not come soon), this distinguished-looking man
and his rather common-looking wife who had been talking to
Richard—what could one know about people like that?
"That they're damnable humbugs," said Peter, looking at them casu-
ally. He made Sally laugh.
But Sir William Bradshaw stopped at the door to look at a picture. He
looked in the corner for the engraver's name. His wife looked too. Sir
William Bradshaw was so interested in art.
When one was young, said Peter, one was too much excited to know
people. Now that one was old, fifty-two to be precise (Sally was fifty-
five, in body, she said, but her heart was like a girl's of twenty); now that
one was mature then, said Peter, one could watch, one could understand,
and one did not lose the power of feeling, he said. No, that is true, said
Sally. She felt more deeply, more passionately, every year. It increased,
he said, alas, perhaps, but one should be glad of it—it went on increasing
in his experience. There was some one in India. He would like to tell
Sally about her. He would like Sally to know her. She was married, he
said. She had two small children. They must all come to Manchester, said
Sally—he must promise before they left.
There's Elizabeth, he said, she feels not half what we feel, not yet. But,
said Sally, watching Elizabeth go to her father, one can see they are de-
voted to each other. She could feel it by the way Elizabeth went to her father.
For her father had been looking at her, as he stood talking to the Brad-
shaws, and he had thought to himself, Who is that lovely girl? And sud-
denly he realised that it was his Elizabeth, and he had not recognised
her, she looked so lovely in her pink frock! Elizabeth had felt him look-
ing at her as she talked to Willie Titcomb. So she went to him and they
stood together, now that the party was almost over, looking at the people
going, and the rooms getting emptier and emptier, with things scattered
on the floor. Even Ellie Henderson was going, nearly last of all, though
no one had spoken to her, but she had wanted to see everything, to tell
Edith. And Richard and Elizabeth were rather glad it was over, but
Richard was proud of his daughter. And he had not meant to tell her, but
he could not help telling her. He had looked at her, he said, and he had
wondered, Who is that lovely girl? and it was his daughter! That did
make her happy. But her poor dog was howling.
"Richard has improved. You are right," said Sally. "I shall go and talk
to him. I shall say goodnight. What does the brain matter," said Lady
Rosseter, getting up, "compared with the heart?"
"I will come," said Peter, but he sat on for a moment. What is this ter-
ror? what is this ecstasy? he thought to himself. What is it that fills me
with extraordinary excitement?
It is Clarissa, he said.
For there she was.
15.1 System Component
An object recognition system must have the following components to perform
the task:
• Model database (also called modelbase)
• Feature detector
• Hypothesizer
• Hypothesis verifier
A block diagram showing interactions and information flow among different
components of the system is given in Figure 15.I.
The model database contains all the models known to the system. The
information in the model database depends on the approach used for the
recognition. It can vary from a qualitative or functional description to precise geometric surface information. In many cases, the models of objects
are abstract feature vectors, as discussed later in this section. A feature is
some attribute of the object that is considered important in describing and
recognizing the object in relation to other objects. Size, color, and shape are
some commonly used features.
The feature detector applies operators to images and identifies locations
of features that help in forming object hypotheses. The features used by a 
system depend on the types of objects to be recognized and the organization of the model database. Using the detected features in the image, the
hypothesizer assigns likelihoods to objects present in the scene. This step
is used to reduce the search space for the recognizer using certain features.
The modelbase is organized using some type of indexing scheme to facilitate elimination of unlikely object candidates from possible consideration.
The verifier then uses object models to verify the hypotheses and refines the
likelihood of objects. The system then selects the object with the highest
likelihood, based on all the evidence, as the correct object.
All object recognition systems use models either explicitly or implicitly
and employ feature detectors based on these object models. The hypothesis
formation and verification components vary in their importance in different
approaches to object recognition. Some systems use only hypothesis formation and then select the object with highest likelihood as the correct object.
Pattern classification approaches are a good example of this approach. Many
artificial intelligence systems, on the other hand, rely little on the hypothesis
formation and do more work in the verification phases. In fact, one of the
classical approaches, template matching, bypasses the hypothesis formation stage entirely.
An object recognition system must select appropriate tools and techniques
for the steps discussed above. Many factors must be considered in the selection of appropriate methods for a particular application. The central issues
that should be considered in designing an object recognition system are:
• 	 Object or model representation: How should objects be represented in
the model database? What are the important attributes or features
of objects that must be captured in these models? For some objects,
geometric descriptions may be available and may also be efficient, while
for another class one may have to rely on generic or functional features.
The representation of an object should capture all relevant information
without any redundancies and should organize this information in a
form that allows easy access by different components of the object
recognition system.
• 	 Feature extraction: Which features should be detected, and how can
they be detected reliably? Most features can be computed in two-dimensional images but they are related to three-dimensional characteristics of objects. 
Due to the nature of the image formation process, some features are easy to compute reliably while others are very difficult. Feature detection issues were discussed in many chapters in this
book.
• 	 Feature-model matching: How can features in images be matched to
models in the database? In most object recognition tasks, there are
many features and numerous objects. An exhaustive matching approach will solve the recognition problem but may be too slow to be
useful. Effectiveness of features and efficiency of a matching technique
must be considered in developing a matching approach.
• 	 Hypotheses formation: How can a set of likely objects based on the
feature matching be selected, and how can probabilities be assigned
to each possible object? The hypothesis formation step is basically a
heuristic to reduce the size of the search space. This step uses knowledge of the application domain to assign some kind of probability or
confidence measure to different objects in the domain. This measure
reflects the likelihood of the presence of objects based on the detected
features.
• 	 Object verification: How can object models be used to select the most
likely object from the set of probable objects in a given image? The
presence of each likely object can be verified by using their models. One
must examine each plausible hypothesis to verify the presence of the
object or ignore it. If the models are geometric, it is easy to precisely
verify objects using camera location and other scene parameters. In
other cases, it may not be possible to verify a hypothesis.
Depending on the complexity of the problem, one or more modules in
Figure 15.1 may become trivial. For example, pattern recognition-based
object recognition systems do not use any feature-model matching or object
verification; they directly assign probabilities to objects and select the object
with the highest probability. 
— I —
[ 1 ]
Stately, plump Buck Mulligan came from the stairhead, bearing a bowl of
lather on which a mirror and a razor lay crossed. A yellow
dressinggown, ungirdled, was sustained gently behind him on the mild
morning air. He held the bowl aloft and intoned:
—_Introibo ad altare Dei_.
Halted, he peered down the dark winding stairs and called out coarsely:
—Come up, Kinch! Come up, you fearful jesuit!
Solemnly he came forward and mounted the round gunrest. He faced about
and blessed gravely thrice the tower, the surrounding land and the
awaking mountains. Then, catching sight of Stephen Dedalus, he bent
towards him and made rapid crosses in the air, gurgling in his throat
and shaking his head. Stephen Dedalus, displeased and sleepy, leaned
his arms on the top of the staircase and looked coldly at the shaking
gurgling face that blessed him, equine in its length, and at the light
untonsured hair, grained and hued like pale oak.
Buck Mulligan peeped an instant under the mirror and then covered the
bowl smartly.
—Back to barracks! he said sternly.
He added in a preacher’s tone:
—For this, O dearly beloved, is the genuine Christine: body and soul
and blood and ouns. Slow music, please. Shut your eyes, gents. One
moment. A little trouble about those white corpuscles. Silence, all.
He peered sideways up and gave a long slow whistle of call, then paused
awhile in rapt attention, his even white teeth glistening here and
there with gold points. Chrysostomos. Two strong shrill whistles
answered through the calm.
—Thanks, old chap, he cried briskly. That will do nicely. Switch off
the current, will you?
He skipped off the gunrest and looked gravely at his watcher, gathering
about his legs the loose folds of his gown. The plump shadowed face and
sullen oval jowl recalled a prelate, patron of arts in the middle ages.
A pleasant smile broke quietly over his lips.
—The mockery of it! he said gaily. Your absurd name, an ancient Greek!
He pointed his finger in friendly jest and went over to the parapet,
laughing to himself. Stephen Dedalus stepped up, followed him wearily
halfway and sat down on the edge of the gunrest, watching him still as
he propped his mirror on the parapet, dipped the brush in the bowl and
lathered cheeks and neck.
Buck Mulligan’s gay voice went on.
—My name is absurd too: Malachi Mulligan, two dactyls. But it has a
Hellenic ring, hasn’t it? Tripping and sunny like the buck himself. We
must go to Athens. Will you come if I can get the aunt to fork out
twenty quid?
He laid the brush aside and, laughing with delight, cried:
—Will he come? The jejune jesuit!
Ceasing, he began to shave with care.
—Tell me, Mulligan, Stephen said quietly.
—Yes, my love?
—How long is Haines going to stay in this tower?
Buck Mulligan showed a shaven cheek over his right shoulder.
—God, isn’t he dreadful? he said frankly. A ponderous Saxon. He thinks
you’re not a gentleman. God, these bloody English! Bursting with money
and indigestion. Because he comes from Oxford. You know, Dedalus, you
have the real Oxford manner. He can’t make you out. O, my name for you
is the best: Kinch, the knife-blade.
He shaved warily over his chin.
—He was raving all night about a black panther, Stephen said. Where is
his guncase?
—A woful lunatic! Mulligan said. Were you in a funk?
—I was, Stephen said with energy and growing fear. Out here in the dark
with a man I don’t know raving and moaning to himself about shooting a
black panther. You saved men from drowning. I’m not a hero, however. If
he stays on here I am off.
Buck Mulligan frowned at the lather on his razorblade. He hopped down
from his perch and began to search his trouser pockets hastily.
—Scutter! he cried thickly.
He came over to the gunrest and, thrusting a hand into Stephen’s upper
pocket, said:
—Lend us a loan of your noserag to wipe my razor.
Stephen suffered him to pull out and hold up on show by its corner a
dirty crumpled handkerchief. Buck Mulligan wiped the razorblade neatly.
Then, gazing over the handkerchief, he said:
—The bard’s noserag! A new art colour for our Irish poets: snotgreen.
You can almost taste it, can’t you?
He mounted to the parapet again and gazed out over Dublin bay, his fair
oakpale hair stirring slightly.
—God! he said quietly. Isn’t the sea what Algy calls it: a great sweet
mother? The snotgreen sea. The scrotumtightening sea. _Epi oinopa
ponton_. Ah, Dedalus, the Greeks! I must teach you. You must read them
in the original. _Thalatta! Thalatta!_ She is our great sweet mother.
Come and look.
Stephen stood up and went over to the parapet. Leaning on it he looked
down on the water and on the mailboat clearing the harbourmouth of
Kingstown.
—Our mighty mother! Buck Mulligan said.
He turned abruptly his grey searching eyes from the sea to Stephen’s
face.
—The aunt thinks you killed your mother, he said. That’s why she won’t
let me have anything to do with you.
—Someone killed her, Stephen said gloomily.
—You could have knelt down, damn it, Kinch, when your dying mother
asked you, Buck Mulligan said. I’m hyperborean as much as you. But to
think of your mother begging you with her last breath to kneel down and
pray for her. And you refused. There is something sinister in you....
He broke off and lathered again lightly his farther cheek. A tolerant
smile curled his lips.
—But a lovely mummer! he murmured to himself. Kinch, the loveliest
mummer of them all!
He shaved evenly and with care, in silence, seriously.
Stephen, an elbow rested on the jagged granite, leaned his palm against
his brow and gazed at the fraying edge of his shiny black coat-sleeve.
Pain, that was not yet the pain of love, fretted his heart. Silently,
in a dream she had come to him after her death, her wasted body within
its loose brown graveclothes giving off an odour of wax and rosewood,
her breath, that had bent upon him, mute, reproachful, a faint odour of
wetted ashes. Across the threadbare cuffedge he saw the sea hailed as a
great sweet mother by the wellfed voice beside him. The ring of bay and
skyline held a dull green mass of liquid. A bowl of white china had
stood beside her deathbed holding the green sluggish bile which she had
torn up from her rotting liver by fits of loud groaning vomiting.
Buck Mulligan wiped again his razorblade.
—Ah, poor dogsbody! he said in a kind voice. I must give you a shirt
and a few noserags. How are the secondhand breeks?
—They fit well enough, Stephen answered.
Buck Mulligan attacked the hollow beneath his underlip.
—The mockery of it, he said contentedly. Secondleg they should be. God
knows what poxy bowsy left them off. I have a lovely pair with a hair
stripe, grey. You’ll look spiffing in them. I’m not joking, Kinch. You
look damn well when you’re dressed.
—Thanks, Stephen said. I can’t wear them if they are grey.
—He can’t wear them, Buck Mulligan told his face in the mirror.
Etiquette is etiquette. He kills his mother but he can’t wear grey
trousers.
He folded his razor neatly and with stroking palps of fingers felt the
smooth skin.
Stephen turned his gaze from the sea and to the plump face with its
smokeblue mobile eyes.
—That fellow I was with in the Ship last night, said Buck Mulligan,
says you have g. p. i. He’s up in Dottyville with Connolly Norman.
General paralysis of the insane!
He swept the mirror a half circle in the air to flash the tidings
abroad in sunlight now radiant on the sea. His curling shaven lips
laughed and the edges of his white glittering teeth. Laughter seized
all his strong wellknit trunk.
—Look at yourself, he said, you dreadful bard!
Stephen bent forward and peered at the mirror held out to him, cleft by
a crooked crack. Hair on end. As he and others see me. Who chose this
face for me? This dogsbody to rid of vermin. It asks me too.
—I pinched it out of the skivvy’s room, Buck Mulligan said. It does her
all right. The aunt always keeps plainlooking servants for Malachi.
Lead him not into temptation. And her name is Ursula.
Laughing again, he brought the mirror away from Stephen’s peering eyes.
—The rage of Caliban at not seeing his face in a mirror, he said. If
Wilde were only alive to see you!
Drawing back and pointing, Stephen said with bitterness:
—It is a symbol of Irish art. The cracked lookingglass of a servant.
Buck Mulligan suddenly linked his arm in Stephen’s and walked with him
round the tower, his razor and mirror clacking in the pocket where he
had thrust them.
—It’s not fair to tease you like that, Kinch, is it? he said kindly.
God knows you have more spirit than any of them.
Parried again. He fears the lancet of my art as I fear that of his. The
cold steel pen.
—Cracked lookingglass of a servant! Tell that to the oxy chap
downstairs and touch him for a guinea. He’s stinking with money and
thinks you’re not a gentleman. His old fellow made his tin by selling
jalap to Zulus or some bloody swindle or other. God, Kinch, if you and
I could only work together we might do something for the island.
Hellenise it.
Cranly’s arm. His arm.
—And to think of your having to beg from these swine. I’m the only one
that knows what you are. Why don’t you trust me more? What have you up
your nose against me? Is it Haines? If he makes any noise here I’ll
bring down Seymour and we’ll give him a ragging worse than they gave
Clive Kempthorpe.
Young shouts of moneyed voices in Clive Kempthorpe’s rooms. Palefaces:
they hold their ribs with laughter, one clasping another. O, I shall
expire! Break the news to her gently, Aubrey! I shall die! With slit
ribbons of his shirt whipping the air he hops and hobbles round the
table, with trousers down at heels, chased by Ades of Magdalen with the
tailor’s shears. A scared calf’s face gilded with marmalade. I don’t
want to be debagged! Don’t you play the giddy ox with me!
Shouts from the open window startling evening in the quadrangle. A deaf
gardener, aproned, masked with Matthew Arnold’s face, pushes his mower
on the sombre lawn watching narrowly the dancing motes of grasshalms.
To ourselves... new paganism... omphalos.
—Let him stay, Stephen said. There’s nothing wrong with him except at
night.
—Then what is it? Buck Mulligan asked impatiently. Cough it up. I’m
quite frank with you. What have you against me now?
They halted, looking towards the blunt cape of Bray Head that lay on
the water like the snout of a sleeping whale. Stephen freed his arm
quietly.
—Do you wish me to tell you? he asked.
—Yes, what is it? Buck Mulligan answered. I don’t remember anything.
He looked in Stephen’s face as he spoke. A light wind passed his brow,
fanning softly his fair uncombed hair and stirring silver points of
anxiety in his eyes.
Stephen, depressed by his own voice, said:
—Do you remember the first day I went to your house after my mother’s
death?
Buck Mulligan frowned quickly and said:
—What? Where? I can’t remember anything. I remember only ideas and
sensations. Why? What happened in the name of God?
—You were making tea, Stephen said, and went across the landing to get
more hot water. Your mother and some visitor came out of the
drawingroom. She asked you who was in your room.
—Yes? Buck Mulligan said. What did I say? I forget.
—You said, Stephen answered, _O, it’s only Dedalus whose mother is
beastly dead._
A flush which made him seem younger and more engaging rose to Buck
Mulligan’s cheek.
—Did I say that? he asked. Well? What harm is that?
He shook his constraint from him nervously.
—And what is death, he asked, your mother’s or yours or my own? You saw
only your mother die. I see them pop off every day in the Mater and
Richmond and cut up into tripes in the dissectingroom. It’s a beastly
thing and nothing else. It simply doesn’t matter. You wouldn’t kneel
down to pray for your mother on her deathbed when she asked you. Why?
Because you have the cursed jesuit strain in you, only it’s injected
the wrong way. To me it’s all a mockery and beastly. Her cerebral lobes
are not functioning. She calls the doctor sir Peter Teazle and picks
buttercups off the quilt. Humour her till it’s over. You crossed her
last wish in death and yet you sulk with me because I don’t whinge like
some hired mute from Lalouette’s. Absurd! I suppose I did say it. I
didn’t mean to offend the memory of your mother.
He had spoken himself into boldness. Stephen, shielding the gaping
wounds which the words had left in his heart, said very coldly:
—I am not thinking of the offence to my mother.
—Of what then? Buck Mulligan asked.
—Of the offence to me, Stephen answered.
Buck Mulligan swung round on his heel.
—O, an impossible person! he exclaimed.
He walked off quickly round the parapet. Stephen stood at his post,
gazing over the calm sea towards the headland. Sea and headland now
grew dim. Pulses were beating in his eyes, veiling their sight, and he
felt the fever of his cheeks.
A voice within the tower called loudly:
—Are you up there, Mulligan?
—I’m coming, Buck Mulligan answered.
He turned towards Stephen and said:
—Look at the sea. What does it care about offences? Chuck Loyola,
Kinch, and come on down. The Sassenach wants his morning rashers.
His head halted again for a moment at the top of the staircase, level
with the roof:
—Don’t mope over it all day, he said. I’m inconsequent. Give up the
moody brooding.
His head vanished but the drone of his descending voice boomed out of
the stairhead:
     And no more turn aside and brood
     Upon love’s bitter mystery
     For Fergus rules the brazen cars.
Woodshadows floated silently by through the morning peace from the
stairhead seaward where he gazed. Inshore and farther out the mirror of
water whitened, spurned by lightshod hurrying feet. White breast of the
dim sea. The twining stresses, two by two. A hand plucking the
harpstrings, merging their twining chords. Wavewhite wedded words
shimmering on the dim tide.
A cloud began to cover the sun slowly, wholly, shadowing the bay in
deeper green. It lay beneath him, a bowl of bitter waters. Fergus’
song: I sang it alone in the house, holding down the long dark chords.
Her door was open: she wanted to hear my music. Silent with awe and
pity I went to her bedside. She was crying in her wretched bed. For
those words, Stephen: love’s bitter mystery.
Where now?
Her secrets: old featherfans, tasselled dancecards, powdered with musk,
a gaud of amber beads in her locked drawer. A birdcage hung in the
sunny window of her house when she was a girl. She heard old Royce sing
in the pantomime of Turko the Terrible and laughed with others when he
sang:
     I am the boy
     That can enjoy
     Invisibility.
Phantasmal mirth, folded away: muskperfumed.
     And no more turn aside and brood.
Folded away in the memory of nature with her toys. Memories beset his
brooding brain. Her glass of water from the kitchen tap when she had
approached the sacrament. A cored apple, filled with brown sugar,
roasting for her at the hob on a dark autumn evening. Her shapely
fingernails reddened by the blood of squashed lice from the children’s
shirts.
In a dream, silently, she had come to him, her wasted body within its
loose graveclothes giving off an odour of wax and rosewood, her breath,
bent over him with mute secret words, a faint odour of wetted ashes.
Her glazing eyes, staring out of death, to shake and bend my soul. On
me alone. The ghostcandle to light her agony. Ghostly light on the
tortured face. Her hoarse loud breath rattling in horror, while all
prayed on their knees. Her eyes on me to strike me down. _Liliata
rutilantium te confessorum turma circumdet: iubilantium te virginum
chorus excipiat._
Ghoul! Chewer of corpses!
No, mother! Let me be and let me live.
—Kinch ahoy!
Buck Mulligan’s voice sang from within the tower. It came nearer up the
staircase, calling again. Stephen, still trembling at his soul’s cry,
heard warm running sunlight and in the air behind him friendly words.
—Dedalus, come down, like a good mosey. Breakfast is ready. Haines is
apologising for waking us last night. It’s all right.
—I’m coming, Stephen said, turning.
—Do, for Jesus’ sake, Buck Mulligan said. For my sake and for all our
sakes.
His head disappeared and reappeared.
—I told him your symbol of Irish art. He says it’s very clever. Touch
him for a quid, will you? A guinea, I mean.
—I get paid this morning, Stephen said.
—The school kip? Buck Mulligan said. How much? Four quid? Lend us one.
—If you want it, Stephen said.
—Four shining sovereigns, Buck Mulligan cried with delight. We’ll have
a glorious drunk to astonish the druidy druids. Four omnipotent
sovereigns.
He flung up his hands and tramped down the stone stairs, singing out of
tune with a Cockney accent:
     O, won’t we have a merry time,
     Drinking whisky, beer and wine!
     On coronation,
     Coronation day!
     O, won’t we have a merry time
     On coronation day!
Warm sunshine merrying over the sea. The nickel shavingbowl shone,
forgotten, on the parapet. Why should I bring it down? Or leave it
there all day, forgotten friendship?
He went over to it, held it in his hands awhile, feeling its coolness,
smelling the clammy slaver of the lather in which the brush was stuck.
So I carried the boat of incense then at Clongowes. I am another now
and yet the same. A servant too. A server of a servant.
In the gloomy domed livingroom of the tower Buck Mulligan’s gowned form
moved briskly to and fro about the hearth, hiding and revealing its
yellow glow. Two shafts of soft daylight fell across the flagged floor
from the high barbacans: and at the meeting of their rays a cloud of
coalsmoke and fumes of fried grease floated, turning.
—We’ll be choked, Buck Mulligan said. Haines, open that door, will you?
Stephen laid the shavingbowl on the locker. A tall figure rose from the
hammock where it had been sitting, went to the doorway and pulled open
the inner doors.
—Have you the key? a voice asked.
—Dedalus has it, Buck Mulligan said. Janey Mack, I’m choked!
He howled, without looking up from the fire:
—Kinch!
—It’s in the lock, Stephen said, coming forward.
The key scraped round harshly twice and, when the heavy door had been
set ajar, welcome light and bright air entered. Haines stood at the
doorway, looking out. Stephen haled his upended valise to the table and
sat down to wait. Buck Mulligan tossed the fry on to the dish beside
him. Then he carried the dish and a large teapot over to the table, set
them down heavily and sighed with relief.
—I’m melting, he said, as the candle remarked when... But, hush! Not a
word more on that subject! Kinch, wake up! Bread, butter, honey.
Haines, come in. The grub is ready. Bless us, O Lord, and these thy
gifts. Where’s the sugar? O, jay, there’s no milk.
Stephen fetched the loaf and the pot of honey and the buttercooler from
the locker. Buck Mulligan sat down in a sudden pet.
—What sort of a kip is this? he said. I told her to come after eight.
—We can drink it black, Stephen said thirstily. There’s a lemon in the
locker.
—O, damn you and your Paris fads! Buck Mulligan said. I want Sandycove
milk.
Haines came in from the doorway and said quietly:
—That woman is coming up with the milk.
—The blessings of God on you! Buck Mulligan cried, jumping up from his
chair. Sit down. Pour out the tea there. The sugar is in the bag. Here,
I can’t go fumbling at the damned eggs.
He hacked through the fry on the dish and slapped it out on three
plates, saying:
—_In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti._
Haines sat down to pour out the tea.
—I’m giving you two lumps each, he said. But, I say, Mulligan, you do
make strong tea, don’t you?
Buck Mulligan, hewing thick slices from the loaf, said in an old
woman’s wheedling voice:
—When I makes tea I makes tea, as old mother Grogan said. And when I
makes water I makes water.
—By Jove, it is tea, Haines said.
Buck Mulligan went on hewing and wheedling:
—_So I do, Mrs Cahill,_ says she. _Begob, ma’am,_ says Mrs Cahill, _God
send you don’t make them in the one pot._
He lunged towards his messmates in turn a thick slice of bread, impaled
on his knife.
—That’s folk, he said very earnestly, for your book, Haines. Five lines
of text and ten pages of notes about the folk and the fishgods of
Dundrum. Printed by the weird sisters in the year of the big wind.
He turned to Stephen and asked in a fine puzzled voice, lifting his
brows:
—Can you recall, brother, is mother Grogan’s tea and water pot spoken
of in the Mabinogion or is it in the Upanishads?
—I doubt it, said Stephen gravely.
—Do you now? Buck Mulligan said in the same tone. Your reasons, pray?
—I fancy, Stephen said as he ate, it did not exist in or out of the
Mabinogion. Mother Grogan was, one imagines, a kinswoman of Mary Ann.
Buck Mulligan’s face smiled with delight.
—Charming! he said in a finical sweet voice, showing his white teeth
and blinking his eyes pleasantly. Do you think she was? Quite charming!
Then, suddenly overclouding all his features, he growled in a hoarsened
rasping voice as he hewed again vigorously at the loaf:
_—For old Mary Ann
She doesn’t care a damn.
But, hising up her petticoats..._
He crammed his mouth with fry and munched and droned.
The doorway was darkened by an entering form.
—The milk, sir!
—Come in, ma’am, Mulligan said. Kinch, get the jug.
An old woman came forward and stood by Stephen’s elbow.
—That’s a lovely morning, sir, she said. Glory be to God.
—To whom? Mulligan said, glancing at her. Ah, to be sure!
Stephen reached back and took the milkjug from the locker.
—The islanders, Mulligan said to Haines casually, speak frequently of
the collector of prepuces.
—How much, sir? asked the old woman.
—A quart, Stephen said.
He watched her pour into the measure and thence into the jug rich white
milk, not hers. Old shrunken paps. She poured again a measureful and a
tilly. Old and secret she had entered from a morning world, maybe a
messenger. She praised the goodness of the milk, pouring it out.
Crouching by a patient cow at daybreak in the lush field, a witch on
her toadstool, her wrinkled fingers quick at the squirting dugs. They
lowed about her whom they knew, dewsilky cattle. Silk of the kine and
poor old woman, names given her in old times. A wandering crone, lowly
form of an immortal serving her conqueror and her gay betrayer, their
common cuckquean, a messenger from the secret morning. To serve or to
upbraid, whether he could not tell: but scorned to beg her favour.
—It is indeed, ma’am, Buck Mulligan said, pouring milk into their cups.
—Taste it, sir, she said.
He drank at her bidding.
—If we could live on good food like that, he said to her somewhat
loudly, we wouldn’t have the country full of rotten teeth and rotten
guts. Living in a bogswamp, eating cheap food and the streets paved
with dust, horsedung and consumptives’ spits.
—Are you a medical student, sir? the old woman asked.
—I am, ma’am, Buck Mulligan answered.
—Look at that now, she said.
Stephen listened in scornful silence. She bows her old head to a voice
that speaks to her loudly, her bonesetter, her medicineman: me she
slights. To the voice that will shrive and oil for the grave all there
is of her but her woman’s unclean loins, of man’s flesh made not in
God’s likeness, the serpent’s prey. And to the loud voice that now bids
her be silent with wondering unsteady eyes.
—Do you understand what he says? Stephen asked her.
—Is it French you are talking, sir? the old woman said to Haines.
Haines spoke to her again a longer speech, confidently.
—Irish, Buck Mulligan said. Is there Gaelic on you?
—I thought it was Irish, she said, by the sound of it. Are you from the
west, sir?
—I am an Englishman, Haines answered.
—He’s English, Buck Mulligan said, and he thinks we ought to speak
Irish in Ireland.
—Sure we ought to, the old woman said, and I’m ashamed I don’t speak
the language myself. I’m told it’s a grand language by them that knows.
—Grand is no name for it, said Buck Mulligan. Wonderful entirely. Fill
us out some more tea, Kinch. Would you like a cup, ma’am?
—No, thank you, sir, the old woman said, slipping the ring of the
milkcan on her forearm and about to go.
Haines said to her:
—Have you your bill? We had better pay her, Mulligan, hadn’t we?
Stephen filled again the three cups.
—Bill, sir? she said, halting. Well, it’s seven mornings a pint at
twopence is seven twos is a shilling and twopence over and these three
mornings a quart at fourpence is three quarts is a shilling. That’s a
shilling and one and two is two and two, sir.
Buck Mulligan sighed and, having filled his mouth with a crust thickly
buttered on both sides, stretched forth his legs and began to search
his trouser pockets.
—Pay up and look pleasant, Haines said to him, smiling.
Stephen filled a third cup, a spoonful of tea colouring faintly the
thick rich milk. Buck Mulligan brought up a florin, twisted it round in
his fingers and cried:
—A miracle!
He passed it along the table towards the old woman, saying:
—Ask nothing more of me, sweet. All I can give you I give.
Stephen laid the coin in her uneager hand.
—We’ll owe twopence, he said.
—Time enough, sir, she said, taking the coin. Time enough. Good
morning, sir.
She curtseyed and went out, followed by Buck Mulligan’s tender chant:
_—Heart of my heart, were it more,
More would be laid at your feet._
He turned to Stephen and said:
—Seriously, Dedalus. I’m stony. Hurry out to your school kip and bring
us back some money. Today the bards must drink and junket. Ireland
expects that every man this day will do his duty.
—That reminds me, Haines said, rising, that I have to visit your
national library today.
—Our swim first, Buck Mulligan said.
He turned to Stephen and asked blandly:
—Is this the day for your monthly wash, Kinch?
Then he said to Haines:
—The unclean bard makes a point of washing once a month.
—All Ireland is washed by the gulfstream, Stephen said as he let honey
trickle over a slice of the loaf.
Haines from the corner where he was knotting easily a scarf about the
loose collar of his tennis shirt spoke:
—I intend to make a collection of your sayings if you will let me.
Speaking to me. They wash and tub and scrub. Agenbite of inwit.
Conscience. Yet here’s a spot.
—That one about the cracked lookingglass of a servant being the symbol
of Irish art is deuced good.
Buck Mulligan kicked Stephen’s foot under the table and said with
warmth of tone:
—Wait till you hear him on Hamlet, Haines.
—Well, I mean it, Haines said, still speaking to Stephen. I was just
thinking of it when that poor old creature came in.
—Would I make any money by it? Stephen asked.
Haines laughed and, as he took his soft grey hat from the holdfast of
the hammock, said:
—I don’t know, I’m sure.
He strolled out to the doorway. Buck Mulligan bent across to Stephen
and said with coarse vigour:
—You put your hoof in it now. What did you say that for?
—Well? Stephen said. The problem is to get money. From whom? From the
milkwoman or from him. It’s a toss up, I think.
—I blow him out about you, Buck Mulligan said, and then you come along
with your lousy leer and your gloomy jesuit jibes.
—I see little hope, Stephen said, from her or from him.
Buck Mulligan sighed tragically and laid his hand on Stephen’s arm.
—From me, Kinch, he said.
In a suddenly changed tone he added:
—To tell you the God’s truth I think you’re right. Damn all else they
are good for. Why don’t you play them as I do? To hell with them all.
Let us get out of the kip.
He stood up, gravely ungirdled and disrobed himself of his gown, saying
resignedly:
—Mulligan is stripped of his garments.
He emptied his pockets on to the table.
—There’s your snotrag, he said.
And putting on his stiff collar and rebellious tie he spoke to them,
chiding them, and to his dangling watchchain. His hands plunged and
rummaged in his trunk while he called for a clean handkerchief. God,
we’ll simply have to dress the character. I want puce gloves and green
boots. Contradiction. Do I contradict myself? Very well then, I
contradict myself. Mercurial Malachi. A limp black missile flew out of
his talking hands.
—And there’s your Latin quarter hat, he said.
Stephen picked it up and put it on. Haines called to them from the
doorway:
—Are you coming, you fellows?
—I’m ready, Buck Mulligan answered, going towards the door. Come out,
Kinch. You have eaten all we left, I suppose. Resigned he passed out
with grave words and gait, saying, wellnigh with sorrow:
—And going forth he met Butterly.
Stephen, taking his ashplant from its leaningplace, followed them out
and, as they went down the ladder, pulled to the slow iron door and
locked it. He put the huge key in his inner pocket.
At the foot of the ladder Buck Mulligan asked:
—Did you bring the key?
—I have it, Stephen said, preceding them.
He walked on. Behind him he heard Buck Mulligan club with his heavy
bathtowel the leader shoots of ferns or grasses.
—Down, sir! How dare you, sir!
Haines asked:
—Do you pay rent for this tower?
—Twelve quid, Buck Mulligan said.
—To the secretary of state for war, Stephen added over his shoulder.
They halted while Haines surveyed the tower and said at last:
—Rather bleak in wintertime, I should say. Martello you call it?
—Billy Pitt had them built, Buck Mulligan said, when the French were on
the sea. But ours is the _omphalos_.
—What is your idea of Hamlet? Haines asked Stephen.
—No, no, Buck Mulligan shouted in pain. I’m not equal to Thomas Aquinas
and the fiftyfive reasons he has made out to prop it up. Wait till I
have a few pints in me first.
He turned to Stephen, saying, as he pulled down neatly the peaks of his
primrose waistcoat:
—You couldn’t manage it under three pints, Kinch, could you?
—It has waited so long, Stephen said listlessly, it can wait longer.
—You pique my curiosity, Haines said amiably. Is it some paradox?
—Pooh! Buck Mulligan said. We have grown out of Wilde and paradoxes.
It’s quite simple. He proves by algebra that Hamlet’s grandson is
Shakespeare’s grandfather and that he himself is the ghost of his own
father.
—What? Haines said, beginning to point at Stephen. He himself?
Buck Mulligan slung his towel stolewise round his neck and, bending in
loose laughter, said to Stephen’s ear:
—O, shade of Kinch the elder! Japhet in search of a father!
—We’re always tired in the morning, Stephen said to Haines. And it is
rather long to tell.
Buck Mulligan, walking forward again, raised his hands.
—The sacred pint alone can unbind the tongue of Dedalus, he said.
—I mean to say, Haines explained to Stephen as they followed, this
tower and these cliffs here remind me somehow of Elsinore. _That
beetles o’er his base into the sea,_ isn’t it?
Buck Mulligan turned suddenly for an instant towards Stephen but did
not speak. In the bright silent instant Stephen saw his own image in
cheap dusty mourning between their gay attires.
—It’s a wonderful tale, Haines said, bringing them to halt again.
Eyes, pale as the sea the wind had freshened, paler, firm and prudent.
The seas’ ruler, he gazed southward over the bay, empty save for the
smokeplume of the mailboat vague on the bright skyline and a sail
tacking by the Muglins.
—I read a theological interpretation of it somewhere, he said bemused.
The Father and the Son idea. The Son striving to be atoned with the
Father.
Buck Mulligan at once put on a blithe broadly smiling face. He looked
at them, his wellshaped mouth open happily, his eyes, from which he had
suddenly withdrawn all shrewd sense, blinking with mad gaiety. He moved
a doll’s head to and fro, the brims of his Panama hat quivering, and
began to chant in a quiet happy foolish voice:
_—I’m the queerest young fellow that ever you heard.
My mother’s a jew, my father’s a bird.
With Joseph the joiner I cannot agree.
So here’s to disciples and Calvary._
He held up a forefinger of warning.
_—If anyone thinks that I amn’t divine
He’ll get no free drinks when I’m making the wine
But have to drink water and wish it were plain
That I make when the wine becomes water again._
He tugged swiftly at Stephen’s ashplant in farewell and, running
forward to a brow of the cliff, fluttered his hands at his sides like
fins or wings of one about to rise in the air, and chanted:
_—Goodbye, now, goodbye! Write down all I said
And tell Tom, Dick and Harry I rose from the dead.
What’s bred in the bone cannot fail me to fly
And Olivet’s breezy... Goodbye, now, goodbye!_
He capered before them down towards the fortyfoot hole, fluttering his
winglike hands, leaping nimbly, Mercury’s hat quivering in the fresh
wind that bore back to them his brief birdsweet cries.
Haines, who had been laughing guardedly, walked on beside Stephen and
said:
—We oughtn’t to laugh, I suppose. He’s rather blasphemous. I’m not a
believer myself, that is to say. Still his gaiety takes the harm out of
it somehow, doesn’t it? What did he call it? Joseph the Joiner?
—The ballad of joking Jesus, Stephen answered.
—O, Haines said, you have heard it before?
—Three times a day, after meals, Stephen said drily.
—You’re not a believer, are you? Haines asked. I mean, a believer in
the narrow sense of the word. Creation from nothing and miracles and a
personal God.
—There’s only one sense of the word, it seems to me, Stephen said.
Haines stopped to take out a smooth silver case in which twinkled a
green stone. He sprang it open with his thumb and offered it.
—Thank you, Stephen said, taking a cigarette.
Haines helped himself and snapped the case to. He put it back in his
sidepocket and took from his waistcoatpocket a nickel tinderbox, sprang
it open too, and, having lit his cigarette, held the flaming spunk
towards Stephen in the shell of his hands.
—Yes, of course, he said, as they went on again. Either you believe or
you don’t, isn’t it? Personally I couldn’t stomach that idea of a
personal God. You don’t stand for that, I suppose?
—You behold in me, Stephen said with grim displeasure, a horrible
example of free thought.
He walked on, waiting to be spoken to, trailing his ashplant by his
side. Its ferrule followed lightly on the path, squealing at his heels.
My familiar, after me, calling, Steeeeeeeeeeeephen! A wavering line
along the path. They will walk on it tonight, coming here in the dark.
He wants that key. It is mine. I paid the rent. Now I eat his salt
bread. Give him the key too. All. He will ask for it. That was in his
eyes.
—After all, Haines began...
Stephen turned and saw that the cold gaze which had measured him was
not all unkind.
—After all, I should think you are able to free yourself. You are your
own master, it seems to me.
—I am a servant of two masters, Stephen said, an English and an
Italian.
—Italian? Haines said.
A crazy queen, old and jealous. Kneel down before me.
—And a third, Stephen said, there is who wants me for odd jobs.
—Italian? Haines said again. What do you mean?
—The imperial British state, Stephen answered, his colour rising, and
the holy Roman catholic and apostolic church.
Haines detached from his underlip some fibres of tobacco before he
spoke.
—I can quite understand that, he said calmly. An Irishman must think
like that, I daresay. We feel in England that we have treated you
rather unfairly. It seems history is to blame.
The proud potent titles clanged over Stephen’s memory the triumph of
their brazen bells: _et unam sanctam catholicam et apostolicam
ecclesiam:_ the slow growth and change of rite and dogma like his own
rare thoughts, a chemistry of stars. Symbol of the apostles in the mass
for pope Marcellus, the voices blended, singing alone loud in
affirmation: and behind their chant the vigilant angel of the church
militant disarmed and menaced her heresiarchs. A horde of heresies
fleeing with mitres awry: Photius and the brood of mockers of whom
Mulligan was one, and Arius, warring his life long upon the
consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, and Valentine, spurning
Christ’s terrene body, and the subtle African heresiarch Sabellius who
held that the Father was Himself His own Son. Words Mulligan had spoken
a moment since in mockery to the stranger. Idle mockery. The void
awaits surely all them that weave the wind: a menace, a disarming and a
worsting from those embattled angels of the church, Michael’s host, who
defend her ever in the hour of conflict with their lances and their
shields.
Hear, hear! Prolonged applause. _Zut! Nom de Dieu!_
—Of course I’m a Britisher, Haines’s voice said, and I feel as one. I
don’t want to see my country fall into the hands of German jews either.
That’s our national problem, I’m afraid, just now.
Two men stood at the verge of the cliff, watching: businessman,
boatman.
—She’s making for Bullock harbour.
The boatman nodded towards the north of the bay with some disdain.
—There’s five fathoms out there, he said. It’ll be swept up that way
when the tide comes in about one. It’s nine days today.
The man that was drowned. A sail veering about the blank bay waiting
for a swollen bundle to bob up, roll over to the sun a puffy face,
saltwhite. Here I am.
They followed the winding path down to the creek. Buck Mulligan stood
on a stone, in shirtsleeves, his unclipped tie rippling over his
shoulder. A young man clinging to a spur of rock near him, moved slowly
frogwise his green legs in the deep jelly of the water.
—Is the brother with you, Malachi?
—Down in Westmeath. With the Bannons.
—Still there? I got a card from Bannon. Says he found a sweet young
thing down there. Photo girl he calls her.
—Snapshot, eh? Brief exposure.
Buck Mulligan sat down to unlace his boots. An elderly man shot up near
the spur of rock a blowing red face. He scrambled up by the stones,
water glistening on his pate and on its garland of grey hair, water
rilling over his chest and paunch and spilling jets out of his black
sagging loincloth.
Buck Mulligan made way for him to scramble past and, glancing at Haines
and Stephen, crossed himself piously with his thumbnail at brow and
lips and breastbone.
—Seymour’s back in town, the young man said, grasping again his spur of
rock. Chucked medicine and going in for the army.
—Ah, go to God! Buck Mulligan said.
—Going over next week to stew. You know that red Carlisle girl, Lily?
—Yes.
—Spooning with him last night on the pier. The father is rotto with
money.
—Is she up the pole?
—Better ask Seymour that.
—Seymour a bleeding officer! Buck Mulligan said.
He nodded to himself as he drew off his trousers and stood up, saying
tritely:
—Redheaded women buck like goats.
He broke off in alarm, feeling his side under his flapping shirt.
—My twelfth rib is gone, he cried. I’m the _Übermensch._ Toothless
Kinch and I, the supermen.
He struggled out of his shirt and flung it behind him to where his
clothes lay.
—Are you going in here, Malachi?
—Yes. Make room in the bed.
The young man shoved himself backward through the water and reached the
middle of the creek in two long clean strokes. Haines sat down on a
stone, smoking.
—Are you not coming in? Buck Mulligan asked.
—Later on, Haines said. Not on my breakfast.
Stephen turned away.
—I’m going, Mulligan, he said.
—Give us that key, Kinch, Buck Mulligan said, to keep my chemise flat.
Stephen handed him the key. Buck Mulligan laid it across his heaped
clothes.
—And twopence, he said, for a pint. Throw it there.
Stephen threw two pennies on the soft heap. Dressing, undressing. Buck
Mulligan erect, with joined hands before him, said solemnly:
—He who stealeth from the poor lendeth to the Lord. Thus spake
Zarathustra.
His plump body plunged.
—We’ll see you again, Haines said, turning as Stephen walked up the
path and smiling at wild Irish.
Horn of a bull, hoof of a horse, smile of a Saxon.
—The Ship, Buck Mulligan cried. Half twelve.
—Good, Stephen said.
He walked along the upwardcurving path.
     Liliata rutilantium.
     Turma circumdet.
     Iubilantium te virginum.
The priest’s grey nimbus in a niche where he dressed discreetly. I will
not sleep here tonight. Home also I cannot go.
A voice, sweettoned and sustained, called to him from the sea. Turning
the curve he waved his hand. It called again. A sleek brown head, a
seal’s, far out on the water, round.
Usurper.
[ 2 ]
—You, Cochrane, what city sent for him?
—Tarentum, sir.
—Very good. Well?
—There was a battle, sir.
—Very good. Where?
The boy’s blank face asked the blank window.
Fabled by the daughters of memory. And yet it was in some way if not as
memory fabled it. A phrase, then, of impatience, thud of Blake’s wings
of excess. I hear the ruin of all space, shattered glass and toppling
masonry, and time one livid final flame. What’s left us then?
—I forget the place, sir. 279 B. C.
—Asculum, Stephen said, glancing at the name and date in the
gorescarred book.
—Yes, sir. And he said: _Another victory like that and we are done
for._
That phrase the world had remembered. A dull ease of the mind. From a
hill above a corpsestrewn plain a general speaking to his officers,
leaned upon his spear. Any general to any officers. They lend ear.
—You, Armstrong, Stephen said. What was the end of Pyrrhus?
—End of Pyrrhus, sir?
—I know, sir. Ask me, sir, Comyn said.
—Wait. You, Armstrong. Do you know anything about Pyrrhus?
A bag of figrolls lay snugly in Armstrong’s satchel. He curled them
between his palms at whiles and swallowed them softly. Crumbs adhered
to the tissue of his lips. A sweetened boy’s breath. Welloff people,
proud that their eldest son was in the navy. Vico Road, Dalkey.
—Pyrrhus, sir? Pyrrhus, a pier.
All laughed. Mirthless high malicious laughter. Armstrong looked round
at his classmates, silly glee in profile. In a moment they will laugh
more loudly, aware of my lack of rule and of the fees their papas pay.
—Tell me now, Stephen said, poking the boy’s shoulder with the book,
what is a pier.
—A pier, sir, Armstrong said. A thing out in the water. A kind of a
bridge. Kingstown pier, sir.
Some laughed again: mirthless but with meaning. Two in the back bench
whispered. Yes. They knew: had never learned nor ever been innocent.
All. With envy he watched their faces: Edith, Ethel, Gerty, Lily. Their
likes: their breaths, too, sweetened with tea and jam, their bracelets
tittering in the struggle.
—Kingstown pier, Stephen said. Yes, a disappointed bridge.
The words troubled their gaze.
—How, sir? Comyn asked. A bridge is across a river.
For Haines’s chapbook. No-one here to hear. Tonight deftly amid wild
drink and talk, to pierce the polished mail of his mind. What then? A
jester at the court of his master, indulged and disesteemed, winning a
clement master’s praise. Why had they chosen all that part? Not wholly
for the smooth caress. For them too history was a tale like any other
too often heard, their land a pawnshop.
Had Pyrrhus not fallen by a beldam’s hand in Argos or Julius Caesar not
been knifed to death. They are not to be thought away. Time has branded
them and fettered they are lodged in the room of the infinite
possibilities they have ousted. But can those have been possible seeing
that they never were? Or was that only possible which came to pass?
Weave, weaver of the wind.
—Tell us a story, sir.
—O, do, sir. A ghoststory.
—Where do you begin in this? Stephen asked, opening another book.
—_Weep no more,_ Comyn said.
—Go on then, Talbot.
—And the story, sir?
—After, Stephen said. Go on, Talbot.
A swarthy boy opened a book and propped it nimbly under the breastwork
of his satchel. He recited jerks of verse with odd glances at the text:
_—Weep no more, woful shepherds, weep no more
For Lycidas, your sorrow, is not dead,
Sunk though he be beneath the watery floor..._
It must be a movement then, an actuality of the possible as possible.
Aristotle’s phrase formed itself within the gabbled verses and floated
out into the studious silence of the library of Saint Genevieve where
he had read, sheltered from the sin of Paris, night by night. By his
elbow a delicate Siamese conned a handbook of strategy. Fed and feeding
brains about me: under glowlamps, impaled, with faintly beating
feelers: and in my mind’s darkness a sloth of the underworld,
reluctant, shy of brightness, shifting her dragon scaly folds. Thought
is the thought of thought. Tranquil brightness. The soul is in a manner
all that is: the soul is the form of forms. Tranquility sudden, vast,
candescent: form of forms.
Talbot repeated:
_—Through the dear might of Him that walked the waves,
Through the dear might..._
—Turn over, Stephen said quietly. I don’t see anything.
—What, sir? Talbot asked simply, bending forward.
His hand turned the page over. He leaned back and went on again, having
just remembered. Of him that walked the waves. Here also over these
craven hearts his shadow lies and on the scoffer’s heart and lips and
on mine. It lies upon their eager faces who offered him a coin of the
tribute. To Caesar what is Caesar’s, to God what is God’s. A long look
from dark eyes, a riddling sentence to be woven and woven on the
church’s looms. Ay.
     Riddle me, riddle me, randy ro.
     My father gave me seeds to sow.
Talbot slid his closed book into his satchel.
—Have I heard all? Stephen asked.
—Yes, sir. Hockey at ten, sir.
—Half day, sir. Thursday.
—Who can answer a riddle? Stephen asked.
They bundled their books away, pencils clacking, pages rustling.
Crowding together they strapped and buckled their satchels, all
gabbling gaily:
—A riddle, sir? Ask me, sir.
—O, ask me, sir.
—A hard one, sir.
—This is the riddle, Stephen said:
     The cock crew,
     The sky was blue:
     The bells in heaven
     Were striking eleven.
     ’Tis time for this poor soul
     To go to heaven.
What is that?
—What, sir?
—Again, sir. We didn’t hear.
Their eyes grew bigger as the lines were repeated. After a silence
Cochrane said:
—What is it, sir? We give it up.
Stephen, his throat itching, answered:
—The fox burying his grandmother under a hollybush.
He stood up and gave a shout of nervous laughter to which their cries
echoed dismay.
A stick struck the door and a voice in the corridor called:
—Hockey!
They broke asunder, sidling out of their benches, leaping them. Quickly
they were gone and from the lumberroom came the rattle of sticks and
clamour of their boots and tongues.
Sargent who alone had lingered came forward slowly, showing an open
copybook. His tangled hair and scraggy neck gave witness of unreadiness
and through his misty glasses weak eyes looked up pleading. On his
cheek, dull and bloodless, a soft stain of ink lay, dateshaped, recent
and damp as a snail’s bed.
He held out his copybook. The word _Sums_ was written on the headline.
Beneath were sloping figures and at the foot a crooked signature with
blind loops and a blot. Cyril Sargent: his name and seal.
—Mr Deasy told me to write them out all again, he said, and show them
to you, sir.
Stephen touched the edges of the book. Futility.
—Do you understand how to do them now? he asked.
—Numbers eleven to fifteen, Sargent answered. Mr Deasy said I was to
copy them off the board, sir.
—Can you do them yourself? Stephen asked.
—No, sir.
Ugly and futile: lean neck and tangled hair and a stain of ink, a
snail’s bed. Yet someone had loved him, borne him in her arms and in
her heart. But for her the race of the world would have trampled him
underfoot, a squashed boneless snail. She had loved his weak watery
blood drained from her own. Was that then real? The only true thing in
life? His mother’s prostrate body the fiery Columbanus in holy zeal
bestrode. She was no more: the trembling skeleton of a twig burnt in
the fire, an odour of rosewood and wetted ashes. She had saved him from
being trampled underfoot and had gone, scarcely having been. A poor
soul gone to heaven: and on a heath beneath winking stars a fox, red
reek of rapine in his fur, with merciless bright eyes scraped in the
earth, listened, scraped up the earth, listened, scraped and scraped.
Sitting at his side Stephen solved out the problem. He proves by
algebra that Shakespeare’s ghost is Hamlet’s grandfather. Sargent
peered askance through his slanted glasses. Hockeysticks rattled in the
lumberroom: the hollow knock of a ball and calls from the field.
Across the page the symbols moved in grave morrice, in the mummery of
their letters, wearing quaint caps of squares and cubes. Give hands,
traverse, bow to partner: so: imps of fancy of the Moors. Gone too from
the world, Averroes and Moses Maimonides, dark men in mien and
movement, flashing in their mocking mirrors the obscure soul of the
world, a darkness shining in brightness which brightness could not
comprehend.
—Do you understand now? Can you work the second for yourself?
—Yes, sir.
In long shaky strokes Sargent copied the data. Waiting always for a
word of help his hand moved faithfully the unsteady symbols, a faint
hue of shame flickering behind his dull skin. _Amor matris:_ subjective
and objective genitive. With her weak blood and wheysour milk she had
fed him and hid from sight of others his swaddling bands.
Like him was I, these sloping shoulders, this gracelessness. My
childhood bends beside me. Too far for me to lay a hand there once or
lightly. Mine is far and his secret as our eyes. Secrets, silent, stony
sit in the dark palaces of both our hearts: secrets weary of their
tyranny: tyrants, willing to be dethroned.
The sum was done.
—It is very simple, Stephen said as he stood up.
—Yes, sir. Thanks, Sargent answered.
He dried the page with a sheet of thin blottingpaper and carried his
copybook back to his bench.
—You had better get your stick and go out to the others, Stephen said
as he followed towards the door the boy’s graceless form.
—Yes, sir.
In the corridor his name was heard, called from the playfield.
—Sargent!
—Run on, Stephen said. Mr Deasy is calling you.
He stood in the porch and watched the laggard hurry towards the scrappy
field where sharp voices were in strife. They were sorted in teams and
Mr Deasy came away stepping over wisps of grass with gaitered feet.
When he had reached the schoolhouse voices again contending called to
him. He turned his angry white moustache.
—What is it now? he cried continually without listening.
—Cochrane and Halliday are on the same side, sir, Stephen said.
—Will you wait in my study for a moment, Mr Deasy said, till I restore
order here.
And as he stepped fussily back across the field his old man’s voice
cried sternly:
—What is the matter? What is it now?
Their sharp voices cried about him on all sides: their many forms
closed round him, the garish sunshine bleaching the honey of his
illdyed head.
Stale smoky air hung in the study with the smell of drab abraded
leather of its chairs. As on the first day he bargained with me here.
As it was in the beginning, is now. On the sideboard the tray of Stuart
coins, base treasure of a bog: and ever shall be. And snug in their
spooncase of purple plush, faded, the twelve apostles having preached
to all the gentiles: world without end.
A hasty step over the stone porch and in the corridor. Blowing out his
rare moustache Mr Deasy halted at the table.
—First, our little financial settlement, he said.
He brought out of his coat a pocketbook bound by a leather thong. It
slapped open and he took from it two notes, one of joined halves, and
laid them carefully on the table.
—Two, he said, strapping and stowing his pocketbook away.
And now his strongroom for the gold. Stephen’s embarrassed hand moved
over the shells heaped in the cold stone mortar: whelks and money
cowries and leopard shells: and this, whorled as an emir’s turban, and
this, the scallop of saint James. An old pilgrim’s hoard, dead
treasure, hollow shells.
A sovereign fell, bright and new, on the soft pile of the tablecloth.
—Three, Mr Deasy said, turning his little savingsbox about in his hand.
These are handy things to have. See. This is for sovereigns. This is
for shillings. Sixpences, halfcrowns. And here crowns. See.
He shot from it two crowns and two shillings.
—Three twelve, he said. I think you’ll find that’s right.
—Thank you, sir, Stephen said, gathering the money together with shy
haste and putting it all in a pocket of his trousers.
—No thanks at all, Mr Deasy said. You have earned it.
Stephen’s hand, free again, went back to the hollow shells. Symbols too
of beauty and of power. A lump in my pocket: symbols soiled by greed
and misery.
—Don’t carry it like that, Mr Deasy said. You’ll pull it out somewhere
and lose it. You just buy one of these machines. You’ll find them very
handy.
Answer something.
—Mine would be often empty, Stephen said.
The same room and hour, the same wisdom: and I the same. Three times
now. Three nooses round me here. Well? I can break them in this instant
if I will.
—Because you don’t save, Mr Deasy said, pointing his finger. You don’t
know yet what money is. Money is power. When you have lived as long as
I have. I know, I know. If youth but knew. But what does Shakespeare
say? _Put but money in thy purse._
—Iago, Stephen murmured.
He lifted his gaze from the idle shells to the old man’s stare.
—He knew what money was, Mr Deasy said. He made money. A poet, yes, but
an Englishman too. Do you know what is the pride of the English? Do you
know what is the proudest word you will ever hear from an Englishman’s
mouth?
The seas’ ruler. His seacold eyes looked on the empty bay: it seems
history is to blame: on me and on my words, unhating.
—That on his empire, Stephen said, the sun never sets.
—Ba! Mr Deasy cried. That’s not English. A French Celt said that. He
tapped his savingsbox against his thumbnail.
—I will tell you, he said solemnly, what is his proudest boast. _I paid
my way._
Good man, good man.
_—I paid my way. I never borrowed a shilling in my life._ Can you feel
that? _I owe nothing._ Can you?
Mulligan, nine pounds, three pairs of socks, one pair brogues, ties.
Curran, ten guineas. McCann, one guinea. Fred Ryan, two shillings.
Temple, two lunches. Russell, one guinea, Cousins, ten shillings, Bob
Reynolds, half a guinea, Koehler, three guineas, Mrs MacKernan, five
weeks’ board. The lump I have is useless.
—For the moment, no, Stephen answered.
Mr Deasy laughed with rich delight, putting back his savingsbox.
—I knew you couldn’t, he said joyously. But one day you must feel it.
We are a generous people but we must also be just.
—I fear those big words, Stephen said, which make us so unhappy.
Mr Deasy stared sternly for some moments over the mantelpiece at the
shapely bulk of a man in tartan fillibegs: Albert Edward, prince of
Wales.
—You think me an old fogey and an old tory, his thoughtful voice said.
I saw three generations since O’Connell’s time. I remember the famine
in ’46. Do you know that the orange lodges agitated for repeal of the
union twenty years before O’Connell did or before the prelates of your
communion denounced him as a demagogue? You fenians forget some things.
Glorious, pious and immortal memory. The lodge of Diamond in Armagh the
splendid behung with corpses of papishes. Hoarse, masked and armed, the
planters’ covenant. The black north and true blue bible. Croppies lie
down.
Stephen sketched a brief gesture.
—I have rebel blood in me too, Mr Deasy said. On the spindle side. But
I am descended from sir John Blackwood who voted for the union. We are
all Irish, all kings’ sons.
—Alas, Stephen said.
—_Per vias rectas_, Mr Deasy said firmly, was his motto. He voted for
it and put on his topboots to ride to Dublin from the Ards of Down to
do so.
     Lal the ral the ra
     The rocky road to Dublin.
A gruff squire on horseback with shiny topboots. Soft day, sir John!
Soft day, your honour!... Day!... Day!... Two topboots jog dangling on
to Dublin. Lal the ral the ra. Lal the ral the raddy.
—That reminds me, Mr Deasy said. You can do me a favour, Mr Dedalus,
with some of your literary friends. I have a letter here for the press.
Sit down a moment. I have just to copy the end.
He went to the desk near the window, pulled in his chair twice and read
off some words from the sheet on the drum of his typewriter.
—Sit down. Excuse me, he said over his shoulder, _the dictates of
common sense._ Just a moment.
He peered from under his shaggy brows at the manuscript by his elbow
and, muttering, began to prod the stiff buttons of the keyboard slowly,
sometimes blowing as he screwed up the drum to erase an error.
Stephen seated himself noiselessly before the princely presence. Framed
around the walls images of vanished horses stood in homage, their meek
heads poised in air: lord Hastings’ _Repulse_, the duke of
Westminster’s _Shotover_, the duke of Beaufort’s _Ceylon_, _prix de
Paris_, 1866. Elfin riders sat them, watchful of a sign. He saw their
speeds, backing king’s colours, and shouted with the shouts of vanished
crowds.
—Full stop, Mr Deasy bade his keys. _But prompt ventilation of this
allimportant question..._
Where Cranly led me to get rich quick, hunting his winners among the
mudsplashed brakes, amid the bawls of bookies on their pitches and reek
of the canteen, over the motley slush. Even money _Fair Rebel._ Ten to
one the field. Dicers and thimbleriggers we hurried by after the hoofs,
the vying caps and jackets and past the meatfaced woman, a butcher’s
dame, nuzzling thirstily her clove of orange.
Shouts rang shrill from the boys’ playfield and a whirring whistle.
Again: a goal. I am among them, among their battling bodies in a
medley, the joust of life. You mean that knockkneed mother’s darling
who seems to be slightly crawsick? Jousts. Time shocked rebounds, shock
by shock. Jousts, slush and uproar of battles, the frozen deathspew of
the slain, a shout of spearspikes baited with men’s bloodied guts.
—Now then, Mr Deasy said, rising.
He came to the table, pinning together his sheets. Stephen stood up.
—I have put the matter into a nutshell, Mr Deasy said. It’s about the
foot and mouth disease. Just look through it. There can be no two
opinions on the matter.
May I trespass on your valuable space. That doctrine of _laissez faire_
which so often in our history. Our cattle trade. The way of all our old
industries. Liverpool ring which jockeyed the Galway harbour scheme.
European conflagration. Grain supplies through the narrow waters of the
channel. The pluterperfect imperturbability of the department of
agriculture. Pardoned a classical allusion. Cassandra. By a woman who
was no better than she should be. To come to the point at issue.
—I don’t mince words, do I? Mr Deasy asked as Stephen read on.
Foot and mouth disease. Known as Koch’s preparation. Serum and virus.
Percentage of salted horses. Rinderpest. Emperor’s horses at Mürzsteg,
lower Austria. Veterinary surgeons. Mr Henry Blackwood Price. Courteous
offer a fair trial. Dictates of common sense. Allimportant question. In
every sense of the word take the bull by the horns. Thanking you for
the hospitality of your columns.
—I want that to be printed and read, Mr Deasy said. You will see at the
next outbreak they will put an embargo on Irish cattle. And it can be
cured. It is cured. My cousin, Blackwood Price, writes to me it is
regularly treated and cured in Austria by cattledoctors there. They
offer to come over here. I am trying to work up influence with the
department. Now I’m going to try publicity. I am surrounded by
difficulties, by... intrigues by... backstairs influence by...
He raised his forefinger and beat the air oldly before his voice spoke.
—Mark my words, Mr Dedalus, he said. England is in the hands of the
jews. In all the highest places: her finance, her press. And they are
the signs of a nation’s decay. Wherever they gather they eat up the
nation’s vital strength. I have seen it coming these years. As sure as
we are standing here the jew merchants are already at their work of
destruction. Old England is dying.
He stepped swiftly off, his eyes coming to blue life as they passed a
broad sunbeam. He faced about and back again.
—Dying, he said again, if not dead by now.
     The harlot’s cry from street to street
     Shall weave old England’s windingsheet.
His eyes open wide in vision stared sternly across the sunbeam in which
he halted.
—A merchant, Stephen said, is one who buys cheap and sells dear, jew or
gentile, is he not?
—They sinned against the light, Mr Deasy said gravely. And you can see
the darkness in their eyes. And that is why they are wanderers on the
earth to this day.
On the steps of the Paris stock exchange the goldskinned men quoting
prices on their gemmed fingers. Gabble of geese. They swarmed loud,
uncouth about the temple, their heads thickplotting under maladroit
silk hats. Not theirs: these clothes, this speech, these gestures.
Their full slow eyes belied the words, the gestures eager and
unoffending, but knew the rancours massed about them and knew their
zeal was vain. Vain patience to heap and hoard. Time surely would
scatter all. A hoard heaped by the roadside: plundered and passing on.
Their eyes knew their years of wandering and, patient, knew the
dishonours of their flesh.
—Who has not? Stephen said.
—What do you mean? Mr Deasy asked.
He came forward a pace and stood by the table. His underjaw fell
sideways open uncertainly. Is this old wisdom? He waits to hear from
me.
—History, Stephen said, is a nightmare from which I am trying to awake.
From the playfield the boys raised a shout. A whirring whistle: goal.
What if that nightmare gave you a back kick?
—The ways of the Creator are not our ways, Mr Deasy said. All human
history moves towards one great goal, the manifestation of God.
Stephen jerked his thumb towards the window, saying:
—That is God.
Hooray! Ay! Whrrwhee!
—What? Mr Deasy asked.
—A shout in the street, Stephen answered, shrugging his shoulders.
Mr Deasy looked down and held for awhile the wings of his nose tweaked
between his fingers. Looking up again he set them free.
—I am happier than you are, he said. We have committed many errors and
many sins. A woman brought sin into the world. For a woman who was no
better than she should be, Helen, the runaway wife of Menelaus, ten
years the Greeks made war on Troy. A faithless wife first brought the
strangers to our shore here, MacMurrough’s wife and her leman,
O’Rourke, prince of Breffni. A woman too brought Parnell low. Many
errors, many failures but not the one sin. I am a struggler now at the
end of my days. But I will fight for the right till the end.
     For Ulster will fight
     And Ulster will be right.
Stephen raised the sheets in his hand.
—Well, sir, he began.
—I foresee, Mr Deasy said, that you will not remain here very long at
this work. You were not born to be a teacher, I think. Perhaps I am
wrong.
—A learner rather, Stephen said.
And here what will you learn more?
Mr Deasy shook his head.
—Who knows? he said. To learn one must be humble. But life is the great
teacher.
Stephen rustled the sheets again.
—As regards these, he began.
—Yes, Mr Deasy said. You have two copies there. If you can have them
published at once.
_ Telegraph. Irish Homestead._
—I will try, Stephen said, and let you know tomorrow. I know two
editors slightly.
—That will do, Mr Deasy said briskly. I wrote last night to Mr Field,
M.P. There is a meeting of the cattletraders’ association today at the
City Arms hotel. I asked him to lay my letter before the meeting. You
see if you can get it into your two papers. What are they?
_—The Evening Telegraph..._
—That will do, Mr Deasy said. There is no time to lose. Now I have to
answer that letter from my cousin.
—Good morning, sir, Stephen said, putting the sheets in his pocket.
Thank you.
—Not at all, Mr Deasy said as he searched the papers on his desk. I
like to break a lance with you, old as I am.
—Good morning, sir, Stephen said again, bowing to his bent back.
He went out by the open porch and down the gravel path under the trees,
hearing the cries of voices and crack of sticks from the playfield. The
lions couchant on the pillars as he passed out through the gate:
toothless terrors. Still I will help him in his fight. Mulligan will
dub me a new name: the bullockbefriending bard.
—Mr Dedalus!
Running after me. No more letters, I hope.
—Just one moment.
—Yes, sir, Stephen said, turning back at the gate.
Mr Deasy halted, breathing hard and swallowing his breath.
—I just wanted to say, he said. Ireland, they say, has the honour of
being the only country which never persecuted the jews. Do you know
that? No. And do you know why?
He frowned sternly on the bright air.
—Why, sir? Stephen asked, beginning to smile.
—Because she never let them in, Mr Deasy said solemnly.
A coughball of laughter leaped from his throat dragging after it a
rattling chain of phlegm. He turned back quickly, coughing, laughing,
his lifted arms waving to the air.
—She never let them in, he cried again through his laughter as he
stamped on gaitered feet over the gravel of the path. That’s why.
On his wise shoulders through the checkerwork of leaves the sun flung
spangles, dancing coins.
[ 3 ]
Ineluctable modality of the visible: at least that if no more, thought
through my eyes. Signatures of all things I am here to read, seaspawn
and seawrack, the nearing tide, that rusty boot. Snotgreen, bluesilver,
rust: coloured signs. Limits of the diaphane. But he adds: in bodies.
Then he was aware of them bodies before of them coloured. How? By
knocking his sconce against them, sure. Go easy. Bald he was and a
millionaire, _maestro di color che sanno_. Limit of the diaphane in.
Why in? Diaphane, adiaphane. If you can put your five fingers through
it it is a gate, if not a door. Shut your eyes and see.
Stephen closed his eyes to hear his boots crush crackling wrack and
shells. You are walking through it howsomever. I am, a stride at a
time. A very short space of time through very short times of space.
Five, six: the _nacheinander_. Exactly: and that is the ineluctable
modality of the audible. Open your eyes. No. Jesus! If I fell over a
cliff that beetles o’er his base, fell through the _nebeneinander_
ineluctably! I am getting on nicely in the dark. My ash sword hangs at
my side. Tap with it: they do. My two feet in his boots are at the ends
of his legs, _nebeneinander_. Sounds solid: made by the mallet of _Los
Demiurgos_. Am I walking into eternity along Sandymount strand? Crush,
crack, crick, crick. Wild sea money. Dominie Deasy kens them a’.
     Won’t you come to Sandymount,
     Madeline the mare?
Rhythm begins, you see. I hear. A catalectic tetrameter of iambs
marching. No, agallop: _deline the mare_.
Open your eyes now. I will. One moment. Has all vanished since? If I
open and am for ever in the black adiaphane. _Basta!_ I will see if I
can see.
See now. There all the time without you: and ever shall be, world
without end.
They came down the steps from Leahy’s terrace prudently,
_Frauenzimmer_: and down the shelving shore flabbily, their splayed
feet sinking in the silted sand. Like me, like Algy, coming down to our
mighty mother. Number one swung lourdily her midwife’s bag, the other’s
gamp poked in the beach. From the liberties, out for the day. Mrs
Florence MacCabe, relict of the late Patk MacCabe, deeply lamented, of
Bride Street. One of her sisterhood lugged me squealing into life.
Creation from nothing. What has she in the bag? A misbirth with a
trailing navelcord, hushed in ruddy wool. The cords of all link back,
strandentwining cable of all flesh. That is why mystic monks. Will you
be as gods? Gaze in your _omphalos_. Hello. Kinch here. Put me on to
Edenville. Aleph, alpha: nought, nought, one.
Spouse and helpmate of Adam Kadmon: Heva, naked Eve. She had no navel.
Gaze. Belly without blemish, bulging big, a buckler of taut vellum, no,
whiteheaped corn, orient and immortal, standing from everlasting to
everlasting. Womb of sin.
Wombed in sin darkness I was too, made not begotten. By them, the man
with my voice and my eyes and a ghostwoman with ashes on her breath.
They clasped and sundered, did the coupler’s will. From before the ages
He willed me and now may not will me away or ever. A _lex eterna_ stays
about Him. Is that then the divine substance wherein Father and Son are
consubstantial? Where is poor dear Arius to try conclusions? Warring
his life long upon the contransmagnificandjewbangtantiality. Illstarred
heresiarch! In a Greek watercloset he breathed his last: _euthanasia_.
With beaded mitre and with crozier, stalled upon his throne, widower of
a widowed see, with upstiffed _omophorion_, with clotted hinderparts.
Airs romped round him, nipping and eager airs. They are coming, waves.
The whitemaned seahorses, champing, brightwindbridled, the steeds of
Mananaan.
I mustn’t forget his letter for the press. And after? The Ship, half
twelve. By the way go easy with that money like a good young imbecile.
Yes, I must.
His pace slackened. Here. Am I going to aunt Sara’s or not? My
consubstantial father’s voice. Did you see anything of your artist
brother Stephen lately? No? Sure he’s not down in Strasburg terrace
with his aunt Sally? Couldn’t he fly a bit higher than that, eh? And
and and and tell us, Stephen, how is uncle Si? O, weeping God, the
things I married into! De boys up in de hayloft. The drunken little
costdrawer and his brother, the cornet player. Highly respectable
gondoliers! And skeweyed Walter sirring his father, no less! Sir. Yes,
sir. No, sir. Jesus wept: and no wonder, by Christ!
I pull the wheezy bell of their shuttered cottage: and wait. They take
me for a dun, peer out from a coign of vantage.
—It’s Stephen, sir.
—Let him in. Let Stephen in.
A bolt drawn back and Walter welcomes me.
—We thought you were someone else.
In his broad bed nuncle Richie, pillowed and blanketed, extends over
the hillock of his knees a sturdy forearm. Cleanchested. He has washed
the upper moiety.
—Morrow, nephew.
He lays aside the lapboard whereon he drafts his bills of costs for the
eyes of master Goff and master Shapland Tandy, filing consents and
common searches and a writ of _Duces Tecum_. A bogoak frame over his
bald head: Wilde’s _Requiescat_. The drone of his misleading whistle
brings Walter back.
—Yes, sir?
—Malt for Richie and Stephen, tell mother. Where is she?
—Bathing Crissie, sir.
Papa’s little bedpal. Lump of love.
—No, uncle Richie...
—Call me Richie. Damn your lithia water. It lowers. Whusky!
—Uncle Richie, really...
—Sit down or by the law Harry I’ll knock you down.
Walter squints vainly for a chair.
—He has nothing to sit down on, sir.
—He has nowhere to put it, you mug. Bring in our chippendale chair.
Would you like a bite of something? None of your damned lawdeedaw airs
here. The rich of a rasher fried with a herring? Sure? So much the
better. We have nothing in the house but backache pills.
_All’erta!_
He drones bars of Ferrando’s _aria di sortita_. The grandest number,
Stephen, in the whole opera. Listen.
His tuneful whistle sounds again, finely shaded, with rushes of the
air, his fists bigdrumming on his padded knees.
This wind is sweeter.
Houses of decay, mine, his and all. You told the Clongowes gentry you
had an uncle a judge and an uncle a general in the army. Come out of
them, Stephen. Beauty is not there. Nor in the stagnant bay of Marsh’s
library where you read the fading prophecies of Joachim Abbas. For
whom? The hundredheaded rabble of the cathedral close. A hater of his
kind ran from them to the wood of madness, his mane foaming in the
moon, his eyeballs stars. Houyhnhnm, horsenostrilled. The oval equine
faces, Temple, Buck Mulligan, Foxy Campbell, Lanternjaws. Abbas father,
furious dean, what offence laid fire to their brains? Paff! _Descende,
calve, ut ne nimium decalveris_. A garland of grey hair on his
comminated head see him me clambering down to the footpace
(_descende!_), clutching a monstrance, basiliskeyed. Get down,
baldpoll! A choir gives back menace and echo, assisting about the
altar’s horns, the snorted Latin of jackpriests moving burly in their
albs, tonsured and oiled and gelded, fat with the fat of kidneys of
wheat.
And at the same instant perhaps a priest round the corner is elevating
it. Dringdring! And two streets off another locking it into a pyx.
Dringadring! And in a ladychapel another taking housel all to his own
cheek. Dringdring! Down, up, forward, back. Dan Occam thought of that,
invincible doctor. A misty English morning the imp hypostasis tickled
his brain. Bringing his host down and kneeling he heard twine with his
second bell the first bell in the transept (he is lifting his) and,
rising, heard (now I am lifting) their two bells (he is kneeling) twang
in diphthong.
Cousin Stephen, you will never be a saint. Isle of saints. You were
awfully holy, weren’t you? You prayed to the Blessed Virgin that you
might not have a red nose. You prayed to the devil in Serpentine avenue
that the fubsy widow in front might lift her clothes still more from
the wet street. _O si, certo!_ Sell your soul for that, do, dyed rags
pinned round a squaw. More tell me, more still! On the top of the Howth
tram alone crying to the rain: _Naked women! Naked women!_ What about
that, eh?
What about what? What else were they invented for?
Reading two pages apiece of seven books every night, eh? I was young.
You bowed to yourself in the mirror, stepping forward to applause
earnestly, striking face. Hurray for the Goddamned idiot! Hray! No-one
saw: tell no-one. Books you were going to write with letters for
titles. Have you read his F? O yes, but I prefer Q. Yes, but W is
wonderful. O yes, W. Remember your epiphanies written on green oval
leaves, deeply deep, copies to be sent if you died to all the great
libraries of the world, including Alexandria? Someone was to read them
there after a few thousand years, a mahamanvantara. Pico della
Mirandola like. Ay, very like a whale. When one reads these strange
pages of one long gone one feels that one is at one with one who
once...
The grainy sand had gone from under his feet. His boots trod again a
damp crackling mast, razorshells, squeaking pebbles, that on the
unnumbered pebbles beats, wood sieved by the shipworm, lost Armada.
Unwholesome sandflats waited to suck his treading soles, breathing
upward sewage breath, a pocket of seaweed smouldered in seafire under a
midden of man’s ashes. He coasted them, walking warily. A porterbottle
stood up, stogged to its waist, in the cakey sand dough. A sentinel:
isle of dreadful thirst. Broken hoops on the shore; at the land a maze
of dark cunning nets; farther away chalkscrawled backdoors and on the
higher beach a dryingline with two crucified shirts. Ringsend: wigwams
of brown steersmen and master mariners. Human shells.
He halted. I have passed the way to aunt Sara’s. Am I not going there?
Seems not. No-one about. He turned northeast and crossed the firmer
sand towards the Pigeonhouse.
_—Qui vous a mis dans cette fichue position?_
_—C’est le pigeon, Joseph._
Patrice, home on furlough, lapped warm milk with me in the bar
MacMahon. Son of the wild goose, Kevin Egan of Paris. My father’s a
bird, he lapped the sweet _lait chaud_ with pink young tongue, plump
bunny’s face. Lap, _lapin._ He hopes to win in the _gros lots_. About
the nature of women he read in Michelet. But he must send me _La Vie de
Jésus_ by M. Léo Taxil. Lent it to his friend.
_—C’est tordant, vous savez. Moi, je suis socialiste. Je ne crois pas
en l’existence de Dieu. Faut pas le dire à mon père._
_—Il croit?_
_—Mon père, oui._
_Schluss_. He laps.
My Latin quarter hat. God, we simply must dress the character. I want
puce gloves. You were a student, weren’t you? Of what in the other
devil’s name? Paysayenn. P. C. N., you know: _physiques, chimiques et
naturelles_. Aha. Eating your groatsworth of _mou en civet_, fleshpots
of Egypt, elbowed by belching cabmen. Just say in the most natural
tone: when I was in Paris; _boul’ Mich’_, I used to. Yes, used to carry
punched tickets to prove an alibi if they arrested you for murder
somewhere. Justice. On the night of the seventeenth of February 1904
the prisoner was seen by two witnesses. Other fellow did it: other me.
Hat, tie, overcoat, nose. _Lui, c’est moi_. You seem to have enjoyed
yourself.
Proudly walking. Whom were you trying to walk like? Forget: a
dispossessed. With mother’s money order, eight shillings, the banging
door of the post office slammed in your face by the usher. Hunger
toothache. _Encore deux minutes_. Look clock. Must get. _Fermé_. Hired
dog! Shoot him to bloody bits with a bang shotgun, bits man spattered
walls all brass buttons. Bits all khrrrrklak in place clack back. Not
hurt? O, that’s all right. Shake hands. See what I meant, see? O,
that’s all right. Shake a shake. O, that’s all only all right.
You were going to do wonders, what? Missionary to Europe after fiery
Columbanus. Fiacre and Scotus on their creepystools in heaven spilt
from their pintpots, loudlatinlaughing: _Euge! Euge!_ Pretending to
speak broken English as you dragged your valise, porter threepence,
across the slimy pier at Newhaven. _Comment?_ Rich booty you brought
back; _Le Tutu_, five tattered numbers of _Pantalon Blanc et Culotte
Rouge_; a blue French telegram, curiosity to show:
—Mother dying come home father.
The aunt thinks you killed your mother. That’s why she won’t.
     Then here’s a health to Mulligan’s aunt
     And I’ll tell you the reason why.
     She always kept things decent in
     The Hannigan famileye.
His feet marched in sudden proud rhythm over the sand furrows, along by
the boulders of the south wall. He stared at them proudly, piled stone
mammoth skulls. Gold light on sea, on sand, on boulders. The sun is
there, the slender trees, the lemon houses.
Paris rawly waking, crude sunlight on her lemon streets. Moist pith of
farls of bread, the froggreen wormwood, her matin incense, court the
air. Belluomo rises from the bed of his wife’s lover’s wife, the
kerchiefed housewife is astir, a saucer of acetic acid in her hand. In
Rodot’s Yvonne and Madeleine newmake their tumbled beauties, shattering
with gold teeth _chaussons_ of pastry, their mouths yellowed with the
_pus_ of _flan bréton_. Faces of Paris men go by, their wellpleased
pleasers, curled conquistadores.
Noon slumbers. Kevin Egan rolls gunpowder cigarettes through fingers
smeared with printer’s ink, sipping his green fairy as Patrice his
white. About us gobblers fork spiced beans down their gullets. _Un demi
sétier!_ A jet of coffee steam from the burnished caldron. She serves
me at his beck. _Il est irlandais. Hollandais? Non fromage. Deux
irlandais, nous, Irlande, vous savez ah, oui!_ She thought you wanted a
cheese _hollandais_. Your postprandial, do you know that word?
Postprandial. There was a fellow I knew once in Barcelona, queer
fellow, used to call it his postprandial. Well: _slainte!_ Around the
slabbed tables the tangle of wined breaths and grumbling gorges. His
breath hangs over our saucestained plates, the green fairy’s fang
thrusting between his lips. Of Ireland, the Dalcassians, of hopes,
conspiracies, of Arthur Griffith now, A E, pimander, good shepherd of
men. To yoke me as his yokefellow, our crimes our common cause. You’re
your father’s son. I know the voice. His fustian shirt,
sanguineflowered, trembles its Spanish tassels at his secrets. M.
Drumont, famous journalist, Drumont, know what he called queen
Victoria? Old hag with the yellow teeth. _Vieille ogresse_ with the
_dents jaunes_. Maud Gonne, beautiful woman, _La Patrie_, M. Millevoye,
Félix Faure, know how he died? Licentious men. The froeken, _bonne à
tout faire_, who rubs male nakedness in the bath at Upsala. _Moi
faire_, she said, _Tous les messieurs_. Not this _Monsieur_, I said.
Most licentious custom. Bath a most private thing. I wouldn’t let my
brother, not even my own brother, most lascivious thing. Green eyes, I
see you. Fang, I feel. Lascivious people.
The blue fuse burns deadly between hands and burns clear. Loose
tobaccoshreds catch fire: a flame and acrid smoke light our corner. Raw
facebones under his peep of day boy’s hat. How the head centre got
away, authentic version. Got up as a young bride, man, veil,
orangeblossoms, drove out the road to Malahide. Did, faith. Of lost
leaders, the betrayed, wild escapes. Disguises, clutched at, gone, not
here.
Spurned lover. I was a strapping young gossoon at that time, I tell
you. I’ll show you my likeness one day. I was, faith. Lover, for her
love he prowled with colonel Richard Burke, tanist of his sept, under
the walls of Clerkenwell and, crouching, saw a flame of vengeance hurl
them upward in the fog. Shattered glass and toppling masonry. In gay
Paree he hides, Egan of Paris, unsought by any save by me. Making his
day’s stations, the dingy printingcase, his three taverns, the
Montmartre lair he sleeps short night in, rue de la Goutte-d’Or,
damascened with flyblown faces of the gone. Loveless, landless,
wifeless. She is quite nicey comfy without her outcast man, madame in
rue Gît-le-Cœur, canary and two buck lodgers. Peachy cheeks, a zebra
skirt, frisky as a young thing’s. Spurned and undespairing. Tell Pat
you saw me, won’t you? I wanted to get poor Pat a job one time. _Mon
fils_, soldier of France. I taught him to sing _The boys of Kilkenny
are stout roaring blades_. Know that old lay? I taught Patrice that.
Old Kilkenny: saint Canice, Strongbow’s castle on the Nore. Goes like
this. _O, O_. He takes me, Napper Tandy, by the hand.
     O, O the boys of
     Kilkenny...
Weak wasting hand on mine. They have forgotten Kevin Egan, not he them.
Remembering thee, O Sion.
He had come nearer the edge of the sea and wet sand slapped his boots.
The new air greeted him, harping in wild nerves, wind of wild air of
seeds of brightness. Here, I am not walking out to the Kish lightship,
am I? He stood suddenly, his feet beginning to sink slowly in the
quaking soil. Turn back.
Turning, he scanned the shore south, his feet sinking again slowly in
new sockets. The cold domed room of the tower waits. Through the
barbacans the shafts of light are moving ever, slowly ever as my feet
are sinking, creeping duskward over the dial floor. Blue dusk,
nightfall, deep blue night. In the darkness of the dome they wait,
their pushedback chairs, my obelisk valise, around a board of abandoned
platters. Who to clear it? He has the key. I will not sleep there when
this night comes. A shut door of a silent tower, entombing their blind
bodies, the panthersahib and his pointer. Call: no answer. He lifted
his feet up from the suck and turned back by the mole of boulders. Take
all, keep all. My soul walks with me, form of forms. So in the moon’s
midwatches I pace the path above the rocks, in sable silvered, hearing
Elsinore’s tempting flood.
The flood is following me. I can watch it flow past from here. Get back
then by the Poolbeg road to the strand there. He climbed over the sedge
and eely oarweeds and sat on a stool of rock, resting his ashplant in a
grike.
A bloated carcass of a dog lay lolled on bladderwrack. Before him the
gunwale of a boat, sunk in sand. _Un coche ensablé_ Louis Veuillot
called Gautier’s prose. These heavy sands are language tide and wind
have silted here. And these, the stoneheaps of dead builders, a warren
of weasel rats. Hide gold there. Try it. You have some. Sands and
stones. Heavy of the past. Sir Lout’s toys. Mind you don’t get one bang
on the ear. I’m the bloody well gigant rolls all them bloody well
boulders, bones for my steppingstones. Feefawfum. I zmellz de bloodz
odz an Iridzman.
A point, live dog, grew into sight running across the sweep of sand.
Lord, is he going to attack me? Respect his liberty. You will not be
master of others or their slave. I have my stick. Sit tight. From
farther away, walking shoreward across from the crested tide, figures,
two. The two maries. They have tucked it safe mong the bulrushes.
Peekaboo. I see you. No, the dog. He is running back to them. Who?
Galleys of the Lochlanns ran here to beach, in quest of prey, their
bloodbeaked prows riding low on a molten pewter surf. Dane vikings,
torcs of tomahawks aglitter on their breasts when Malachi wore the
collar of gold. A school of turlehide whales stranded in hot noon,
spouting, hobbling in the shallows. Then from the starving cagework
city a horde of jerkined dwarfs, my people, with flayers’ knives,
running, scaling, hacking in green blubbery whalemeat. Famine, plague
and slaughters. Their blood is in me, their lusts my waves. I moved
among them on the frozen Liffey, that I, a changeling, among the
spluttering resin fires. I spoke to no-one: none to me.
The dog’s bark ran towards him, stopped, ran back. Dog of my enemy. I
just simply stood pale, silent, bayed about. _Terribilia meditans_. A
primrose doublet, fortune’s knave, smiled on my fear. For that are you
pining, the bark of their applause? Pretenders: live their lives. The
Bruce’s brother, Thomas Fitzgerald, silken knight, Perkin Warbeck,
York’s false scion, in breeches of silk of whiterose ivory, wonder of a
day, and Lambert Simnel, with a tail of nans and sutlers, a scullion
crowned. All kings’ sons. Paradise of pretenders then and now. He saved
men from drowning and you shake at a cur’s yelping. But the courtiers
who mocked Guido in Or san Michele were in their own house. House of...
We don’t want any of your medieval abstrusiosities. Would you do what
he did? A boat would be near, a lifebuoy. _Natürlich_, put there for
you. Would you or would you not? The man that was drowned nine days ago
off Maiden’s rock. They are waiting for him now. The truth, spit it
out. I would want to. I would try. I am not a strong swimmer. Water
cold soft. When I put my face into it in the basin at Clongowes. Can’t
see! Who’s behind me? Out quickly, quickly! Do you see the tide flowing
quickly in on all sides, sheeting the lows of sand quickly,
shellcocoacoloured? If I had land under my feet. I want his life still
to be his, mine to be mine. A drowning man. His human eyes scream to me
out of horror of his death. I... With him together down... I could not
save her. Waters: bitter death: lost.
A woman and a man. I see her skirties. Pinned up, I bet.
Their dog ambled about a bank of dwindling sand, trotting, sniffing on
all sides. Looking for something lost in a past life. Suddenly he made
off like a bounding hare, ears flung back, chasing the shadow of a
lowskimming gull. The man’s shrieked whistle struck his limp ears. He
turned, bounded back, came nearer, trotted on twinkling shanks. On a
field tenney a buck, trippant, proper, unattired. At the lacefringe of
the tide he halted with stiff forehoofs, seawardpointed ears. His snout
lifted barked at the wavenoise, herds of seamorse. They serpented
towards his feet, curling, unfurling many crests, every ninth,
breaking, plashing, from far, from farther out, waves and waves.
Cocklepickers. They waded a little way in the water and, stooping,
soused their bags and, lifting them again, waded out. The dog yelped
running to them, reared up and pawed them, dropping on all fours, again
reared up at them with mute bearish fawning. Unheeded he kept by them
as they came towards the drier sand, a rag of wolf’s tongue redpanting
from his jaws. His speckled body ambled ahead of them and then loped
off at a calf’s gallop. The carcass lay on his path. He stopped,
sniffed, stalked round it, brother, nosing closer, went round it,
sniffling rapidly like a dog all over the dead dog’s bedraggled fell.
Dogskull, dogsniff, eyes on the ground, moves to one great goal. Ah,
poor dogsbody! Here lies poor dogsbody’s body.
—Tatters! Out of that, you mongrel!
The cry brought him skulking back to his master and a blunt bootless
kick sent him unscathed across a spit of sand, crouched in flight. He
slunk back in a curve. Doesn’t see me. Along by the edge of the mole he
lolloped, dawdled, smelt a rock and from under a cocked hindleg pissed
against it. He trotted forward and, lifting again his hindleg, pissed
quick short at an unsmelt rock. The simple pleasures of the poor. His
hindpaws then scattered the sand: then his forepaws dabbled and delved.
Something he buried there, his grandmother. He rooted in the sand,
dabbling, delving and stopped to listen to the air, scraped up the sand
again with a fury of his claws, soon ceasing, a pard, a panther, got in
spousebreach, vulturing the dead.
After he woke me last night same dream or was it? Wait. Open hallway.
Street of harlots. Remember. Haroun al Raschid. I am almosting it. That
man led me, spoke. I was not afraid. The melon he had he held against
my face. Smiled: creamfruit smell. That was the rule, said. In. Come.
Red carpet spread. You will see who.
Shouldering their bags they trudged, the red Egyptians. His blued feet
out of turnedup trousers slapped the clammy sand, a dull brick muffler
strangling his unshaven neck. With woman steps she followed: the
ruffian and his strolling mort. Spoils slung at her back. Loose sand
and shellgrit crusted her bare feet. About her windraw face hair
trailed. Behind her lord, his helpmate, bing awast to Romeville. When
night hides her body’s flaws calling under her brown shawl from an
archway where dogs have mired. Her fancyman is treating two Royal
Dublins in O’Loughlin’s of Blackpitts. Buss her, wap in rogues’ rum
lingo, for, O, my dimber wapping dell! A shefiend’s whiteness under her
rancid rags. Fumbally’s lane that night: the tanyard smells.
     White thy fambles, red thy gan
     And thy quarrons dainty is.
     Couch a hogshead with me then.
     In the darkmans clip and kiss.
Morose delectation Aquinas tunbelly calls this, _frate porcospino_.
Unfallen Adam rode and not rutted. Call away let him: _thy quarrons
dainty is_. Language no whit worse than his. Monkwords, marybeads
jabber on their girdles: roguewords, tough nuggets patter in their
pockets.
Passing now.
A side eye at my Hamlet hat. If I were suddenly naked here as I sit? I
am not. Across the sands of all the world, followed by the sun’s
flaming sword, to the west, trekking to evening lands. She trudges,
schlepps, trains, drags, trascines her load. A tide westering,
moondrawn, in her wake. Tides, myriadislanded, within her, blood not
mine, _oinopa ponton_, a winedark sea. Behold the handmaid of the moon.
In sleep the wet sign calls her hour, bids her rise. Bridebed,
childbed, bed of death, ghostcandled. _Omnis caro ad te veniet_. He
comes, pale vampire, through storm his eyes, his bat sails bloodying
the sea, mouth to her mouth’s kiss.
Here. Put a pin in that chap, will you? My tablets. Mouth to her kiss.
No. Must be two of em. Glue em well. Mouth to her mouth’s kiss.
His lips lipped and mouthed fleshless lips of air: mouth to her moomb.
Oomb, allwombing tomb. His mouth moulded issuing breath, unspeeched:
ooeeehah: roar of cataractic planets, globed, blazing, roaring
wayawayawayawayaway. Paper. The banknotes, blast them. Old Deasy’s
letter. Here. Thanking you for the hospitality tear the blank end off.
Turning his back to the sun he bent over far to a table of rock and
scribbled words. That’s twice I forgot to take slips from the library
counter.
His shadow lay over the rocks as he bent, ending. Why not endless till
the farthest star? Darkly they are there behind this light, darkness
shining in the brightness, delta of Cassiopeia, worlds. Me sits there
with his augur’s rod of ash, in borrowed sandals, by day beside a livid
sea, unbeheld, in violet night walking beneath a reign of uncouth
stars. I throw this ended shadow from me, manshape ineluctable, call it
back. Endless, would it be mine, form of my form? Who watches me here?
Who ever anywhere will read these written words? Signs on a white
field. Somewhere to someone in your flutiest voice. The good bishop of
Cloyne took the veil of the temple out of his shovel hat: veil of space
with coloured emblems hatched on its field. Hold hard. Coloured on a
flat: yes, that’s right. Flat I see, then think distance, near, far,
flat I see, east, back. Ah, see now! Falls back suddenly, frozen in
stereoscope. Click does the trick. You find my words dark. Darkness is
in our souls do you not think? Flutier. Our souls, shamewounded by our
sins, cling to us yet more, a woman to her lover clinging, the more the
more.
She trusts me, her hand gentle, the longlashed eyes. Now where the blue
hell am I bringing her beyond the veil? Into the ineluctable modality
of the ineluctable visuality. She, she, she. What she? The virgin at
Hodges Figgis’ window on Monday looking in for one of the alphabet
books you were going to write. Keen glance you gave her. Wrist through
the braided jesse of her sunshade. She lives in Leeson park with a
grief and kickshaws, a lady of letters. Talk that to someone else,
Stevie: a pickmeup. Bet she wears those curse of God stays suspenders
and yellow stockings, darned with lumpy wool. Talk about apple
dumplings, _piuttosto_. Where are your wits?
Touch me. Soft eyes. Soft soft soft hand. I am lonely here. O, touch me
soon, now. What is that word known to all men? I am quiet here alone.
Sad too. Touch, touch me.
He lay back at full stretch over the sharp rocks, cramming the
scribbled note and pencil into a pocket, his hat tilted down on his
eyes. That is Kevin Egan’s movement I made, nodding for his nap,
sabbath sleep. _Et vidit Deus. Et erant valde bona_. Alo! _Bonjour_.
Welcome as the flowers in May. Under its leaf he watched through
peacocktwittering lashes the southing sun. I am caught in this burning
scene. Pan’s hour, the faunal noon. Among gumheavy serpentplants,
milkoozing fruits, where on the tawny waters leaves lie wide. Pain is
far.
     And no more turn aside and brood.
His gaze brooded on his broadtoed boots, a buck’s castoffs,
_nebeneinander_. He counted the creases of rucked leather wherein
another’s foot had nested warm. The foot that beat the ground in
tripudium, foot I dislove. But you were delighted when Esther Osvalt’s
shoe went on you: girl I knew in Paris. _Tiens, quel petit pied!_
Staunch friend, a brother soul: Wilde’s love that dare not speak its
name. His arm: Cranly’s arm. He now will leave me. And the blame? As I
am. As I am. All or not at all.
In long lassoes from the Cock lake the water flowed full, covering
greengoldenly lagoons of sand, rising, flowing. My ashplant will float
away. I shall wait. No, they will pass on, passing, chafing against the
low rocks, swirling, passing. Better get this job over quick. Listen: a
fourworded wavespeech: seesoo, hrss, rsseeiss, ooos. Vehement breath of
waters amid seasnakes, rearing horses, rocks. In cups of rocks it
slops: flop, slop, slap: bounded in barrels. And, spent, its speech
ceases. It flows purling, widely flowing, floating foampool, flower
unfurling.
Under the upswelling tide he saw the writhing weeds lift languidly and
sway reluctant arms, hising up their petticoats, in whispering water
swaying and upturning coy silver fronds. Day by day: night by night:
lifted, flooded and let fall. Lord, they are weary; and, whispered to,
they sigh. Saint Ambrose heard it, sigh of leaves and waves, waiting,
awaiting the fullness of their times, _diebus ac noctibus iniurias
patiens ingemiscit_. To no end gathered; vainly then released,
forthflowing, wending back: loom of the moon. Weary too in sight of
lovers, lascivious men, a naked woman shining in her courts, she draws
a toil of waters.
Five fathoms out there. Full fathom five thy father lies. At one, he
said. Found drowned. High water at Dublin bar. Driving before it a
loose drift of rubble, fanshoals of fishes, silly shells. A corpse
rising saltwhite from the undertow, bobbing a pace a pace a porpoise
landward. There he is. Hook it quick. Pull. Sunk though he be beneath
the watery floor. We have him. Easy now.
Bag of corpsegas sopping in foul brine. A quiver of minnows, fat of a
spongy titbit, flash through the slits of his buttoned trouserfly. God
becomes man becomes fish becomes barnacle goose becomes featherbed
mountain. Dead breaths I living breathe, tread dead dust, devour a
urinous offal from all dead. Hauled stark over the gunwale he breathes
upward the stench of his green grave, his leprous nosehole snoring to
the sun.
A seachange this, brown eyes saltblue. Seadeath, mildest of all deaths
known to man. Old Father Ocean. _Prix de Paris_: beware of imitations.
Just you give it a fair trial. We enjoyed ourselves immensely.
Come. I thirst. Clouding over. No black clouds anywhere, are there?
Thunderstorm. Allbright he falls, proud lightning of the intellect,
_Lucifer, dico, qui nescit occasum_. No. My cockle hat and staff and
hismy sandal shoon. Where? To evening lands. Evening will find itself.
He took the hilt of his ashplant, lunging with it softly, dallying
still. Yes, evening will find itself in me, without me. All days make
their end. By the way next when is it Tuesday will be the longest day.
Of all the glad new year, mother, the rum tum tiddledy tum. Lawn
Tennyson, gentleman poet. _Già_. For the old hag with the yellow teeth.
And Monsieur Drumont, gentleman journalist. _Già_. My teeth are very
bad. Why, I wonder. Feel. That one is going too. Shells. Ought I go to
a dentist, I wonder, with that money? That one. This. Toothless Kinch,
the superman. Why is that, I wonder, or does it mean something perhaps?
My handkerchief. He threw it. I remember. Did I not take it up?
His hand groped vainly in his pockets. No, I didn’t. Better buy one.
He laid the dry snot picked from his nostril on a ledge of rock,
carefully. For the rest let look who will.
Behind. Perhaps there is someone.
He turned his face over a shoulder, rere regardant. Moving through the
air high spars of a threemaster, her sails brailed up on the
crosstrees, homing, upstream, silently moving, a silent ship.
— II —
[ 4 ]
Mr Leopold Bloom ate with relish the inner organs of beasts and fowls.
He liked thick giblet soup, nutty gizzards, a stuffed roast heart,
liverslices fried with crustcrumbs, fried hencods’ roes. Most of all he
liked grilled mutton kidneys which gave to his palate a fine tang of
faintly scented urine.
Kidneys were in his mind as he moved about the kitchen softly, righting
her breakfast things on the humpy tray. Gelid light and air were in the
kitchen but out of doors gentle summer morning everywhere. Made him
feel a bit peckish.
The coals were reddening.
Another slice of bread and butter: three, four: right. She didn’t like
her plate full. Right. He turned from the tray, lifted the kettle off
the hob and set it sideways on the fire. It sat there, dull and squat,
its spout stuck out. Cup of tea soon. Good. Mouth dry. The cat walked
stiffly round a leg of the table with tail on high.
—Mkgnao!
—O, there you are, Mr Bloom said, turning from the fire.
The cat mewed in answer and stalked again stiffly round a leg of the
table, mewing. Just how she stalks over my writingtable. Prr. Scratch
my head. Prr.
Mr Bloom watched curiously, kindly the lithe black form. Clean to see:
the gloss of her sleek hide, the white button under the butt of her
tail, the green flashing eyes. He bent down to her, his hands on his
knees.
—Milk for the pussens, he said.
—Mrkgnao! the cat cried.
They call them stupid. They understand what we say better than we
understand them. She understands all she wants to. Vindictive too.
Cruel. Her nature. Curious mice never squeal. Seem to like it. Wonder
what I look like to her. Height of a tower? No, she can jump me.
—Afraid of the chickens she is, he said mockingly. Afraid of the
chookchooks. I never saw such a stupid pussens as the pussens.
—Mrkrgnao! the cat said loudly.
She blinked up out of her avid shameclosing eyes, mewing plaintively
and long, showing him her milkwhite teeth. He watched the dark eyeslits
narrowing with greed till her eyes were green stones. Then he went to
the dresser, took the jug Hanlon’s milkman had just filled for him,
poured warmbubbled milk on a saucer and set it slowly on the floor.
—Gurrhr! she cried, running to lap.
He watched the bristles shining wirily in the weak light as she tipped
three times and licked lightly. Wonder is it true if you clip them they
can’t mouse after. Why? They shine in the dark, perhaps, the tips. Or
kind of feelers in the dark, perhaps.
He listened to her licking lap. Ham and eggs, no. No good eggs with
this drouth. Want pure fresh water. Thursday: not a good day either for
a mutton kidney at Buckley’s. Fried with butter, a shake of pepper.
Better a pork kidney at Dlugacz’s. While the kettle is boiling. She
lapped slower, then licking the saucer clean. Why are their tongues so
rough? To lap better, all porous holes. Nothing she can eat? He glanced
round him. No.
On quietly creaky boots he went up the staircase to the hall, paused by
the bedroom door. She might like something tasty. Thin bread and butter
she likes in the morning. Still perhaps: once in a way.
He said softly in the bare hall:
—I’m going round the corner. Be back in a minute.
And when he had heard his voice say it he added:
—You don’t want anything for breakfast?
A sleepy soft grunt answered:
—Mn.
No. She didn’t want anything. He heard then a warm heavy sigh, softer,
as she turned over and the loose brass quoits of the bedstead jingled.
Must get those settled really. Pity. All the way from Gibraltar.
Forgotten any little Spanish she knew. Wonder what her father gave for
it. Old style. Ah yes! of course. Bought it at the governor’s auction.
Got a short knock. Hard as nails at a bargain, old Tweedy. Yes, sir. At
Plevna that was. I rose from the ranks, sir, and I’m proud of it. Still
he had brains enough to make that corner in stamps. Now that was
farseeing.
His hand took his hat from the peg over his initialled heavy overcoat
and his lost property office secondhand waterproof. Stamps: stickyback
pictures. Daresay lots of officers are in the swim too. Course they do.
The sweated legend in the crown of his hat told him mutely: Plasto’s
high grade ha. He peeped quickly inside the leather headband. White
slip of paper. Quite safe.
On the doorstep he felt in his hip pocket for the latchkey. Not there.
In the trousers I left off. Must get it. Potato I have. Creaky
wardrobe. No use disturbing her. She turned over sleepily that time. He
pulled the halldoor to after him very quietly, more, till the footleaf
dropped gently over the threshold, a limp lid. Looked shut. All right
till I come back anyhow.
He crossed to the bright side, avoiding the loose cellarflap of number
seventyfive. The sun was nearing the steeple of George’s church. Be a
warm day I fancy. Specially in these black clothes feel it more. Black
conducts, reflects, (refracts is it?), the heat. But I couldn’t go in
that light suit. Make a picnic of it. His eyelids sank quietly often as
he walked in happy warmth. Boland’s breadvan delivering with trays our
daily but she prefers yesterday’s loaves turnovers crisp crowns hot.
Makes you feel young. Somewhere in the east: early morning: set off at
dawn. Travel round in front of the sun, steal a day’s march on him.
Keep it up for ever never grow a day older technically. Walk along a
strand, strange land, come to a city gate, sentry there, old ranker
too, old Tweedy’s big moustaches, leaning on a long kind of a spear.
Wander through awned streets. Turbaned faces going by. Dark caves of
carpet shops, big man, Turko the terrible, seated crosslegged, smoking
a coiled pipe. Cries of sellers in the streets. Drink water scented
with fennel, sherbet. Dander along all day. Might meet a robber or two.
Well, meet him. Getting on to sundown. The shadows of the mosques among
the pillars: priest with a scroll rolled up. A shiver of the trees,
signal, the evening wind. I pass on. Fading gold sky. A mother watches
me from her doorway. She calls her children home in their dark
language. High wall: beyond strings twanged. Night sky, moon, violet,
colour of Molly’s new garters. Strings. Listen. A girl playing one of
those instruments what do you call them: dulcimers. I pass.
Probably not a bit like it really. Kind of stuff you read: in the track
of the sun. Sunburst on the titlepage. He smiled, pleasing himself.
What Arthur Griffith said about the headpiece over the _Freeman_
leader: a homerule sun rising up in the northwest from the laneway
behind the bank of Ireland. He prolonged his pleased smile. Ikey touch
that: homerule sun rising up in the northwest.
He approached Larry O’Rourke’s. From the cellar grating floated up the
flabby gush of porter. Through the open doorway the bar squirted out
whiffs of ginger, teadust, biscuitmush. Good house, however: just the
end of the city traffic. For instance M’Auley’s down there: n. g. as
position. Of course if they ran a tramline along the North Circular
from the cattlemarket to the quays value would go up like a shot.
Baldhead over the blind. Cute old codger. No use canvassing him for an
ad. Still he knows his own business best. There he is, sure enough, my
bold Larry, leaning against the sugarbin in his shirtsleeves watching
the aproned curate swab up with mop and bucket. Simon Dedalus takes him
off to a tee with his eyes screwed up. Do you know what I’m going to
tell you? What’s that, Mr O’Rourke? Do you know what? The Russians,
they’d only be an eight o’clock breakfast for the Japanese.
Stop and say a word: about the funeral perhaps. Sad thing about poor
Dignam, Mr O’Rourke.
Turning into Dorset street he said freshly in greeting through the
doorway:
—Good day, Mr O’Rourke.
—Good day to you.
—Lovely weather, sir.
—’Tis all that.
Where do they get the money? Coming up redheaded curates from the
county Leitrim, rinsing empties and old man in the cellar. Then, lo and
behold, they blossom out as Adam Findlaters or Dan Tallons. Then think
of the competition. General thirst. Good puzzle would be cross Dublin
without passing a pub. Save it they can’t. Off the drunks perhaps. Put
down three and carry five. What is that, a bob here and there, dribs
and drabs. On the wholesale orders perhaps. Doing a double shuffle with
the town travellers. Square it you with the boss and we’ll split the
job, see?
How much would that tot to off the porter in the month? Say ten barrels
of stuff. Say he got ten per cent off. O more. Fifteen. He passed Saint
Joseph’s National school. Brats’ clamour. Windows open. Fresh air helps
memory. Or a lilt. Ahbeesee defeegee kelomen opeecue rustyouvee
doubleyou. Boys are they? Yes. Inishturk. Inishark. Inishboffin. At
their joggerfry. Mine. Slieve Bloom.
He halted before Dlugacz’s window, staring at the hanks of sausages,
polonies, black and white. Fifteen multiplied by. The figures whitened
in his mind, unsolved: displeased, he let them fade. The shiny links,
packed with forcemeat, fed his gaze and he breathed in tranquilly the
lukewarm breath of cooked spicy pigs’ blood.
A kidney oozed bloodgouts on the willowpatterned dish: the last. He
stood by the nextdoor girl at the counter. Would she buy it too,
calling the items from a slip in her hand? Chapped: washingsoda. And a
pound and a half of Denny’s sausages. His eyes rested on her vigorous
hips. Woods his name is. Wonder what he does. Wife is oldish. New
blood. No followers allowed. Strong pair of arms. Whacking a carpet on
the clothesline. She does whack it, by George. The way her crooked
skirt swings at each whack.
The ferreteyed porkbutcher folded the sausages he had snipped off with
blotchy fingers, sausagepink. Sound meat there: like a stallfed heifer.
He took a page up from the pile of cut sheets: the model farm at
Kinnereth on the lakeshore of Tiberias. Can become ideal winter
sanatorium. Moses Montefiore. I thought he was. Farmhouse, wall round
it, blurred cattle cropping. He held the page from him: interesting:
read it nearer, the title, the blurred cropping cattle, the page
rustling. A young white heifer. Those mornings in the cattlemarket, the
beasts lowing in their pens, branded sheep, flop and fall of dung, the
breeders in hobnailed boots trudging through the litter, slapping a
palm on a ripemeated hindquarter, there’s a prime one, unpeeled
switches in their hands. He held the page aslant patiently, bending his
senses and his will, his soft subject gaze at rest. The crooked skirt
swinging, whack by whack by whack.
The porkbutcher snapped two sheets from the pile, wrapped up her prime
sausages and made a red grimace.
—Now, my miss, he said.
She tendered a coin, smiling boldly, holding her thick wrist out.
—Thank you, my miss. And one shilling threepence change. For you,
please?
Mr Bloom pointed quickly. To catch up and walk behind her if she went
slowly, behind her moving hams. Pleasant to see first thing in the
morning. Hurry up, damn it. Make hay while the sun shines. She stood
outside the shop in sunlight and sauntered lazily to the right. He
sighed down his nose: they never understand. Sodachapped hands. Crusted
toenails too. Brown scapulars in tatters, defending her both ways. The
sting of disregard glowed to weak pleasure within his breast. For
another: a constable off duty cuddling her in Eccles’ Lane. They like
them sizeable. Prime sausage. O please, Mr Policeman, I’m lost in the
wood.
—Threepence, please.
His hand accepted the moist tender gland and slid it into a sidepocket.
Then it fetched up three coins from his trousers’ pocket and laid them
on the rubber prickles. They lay, were read quickly and quickly slid,
disc by disc, into the till.
—Thank you, sir. Another time.
A speck of eager fire from foxeyes thanked him. He withdrew his gaze
after an instant. No: better not: another time.
—Good morning, he said, moving away.
—Good morning, sir.
No sign. Gone. What matter?
He walked back along Dorset street, reading gravely. Agendath Netaim:
planters’ company. To purchase waste sandy tracts from Turkish
government and plant with eucalyptus trees. Excellent for shade, fuel
and construction. Orangegroves and immense melonfields north of Jaffa.
You pay eighty marks and they plant a dunam of land for you with
olives, oranges, almonds or citrons. Olives cheaper: oranges need
artificial irrigation. Every year you get a sending of the crop. Your
name entered for life as owner in the book of the union. Can pay ten
down and the balance in yearly instalments. Bleibtreustrasse 34,
Berlin, W. 15.
Nothing doing. Still an idea behind it.
He looked at the cattle, blurred in silver heat. Silverpowdered
olivetrees. Quiet long days: pruning, ripening. Olives are packed in
jars, eh? I have a few left from Andrews. Molly spitting them out.
Knows the taste of them now. Oranges in tissue paper packed in crates.
Citrons too. Wonder is poor Citron still in Saint Kevin’s parade. And
Mastiansky with the old cither. Pleasant evenings we had then. Molly in
Citron’s basketchair. Nice to hold, cool waxen fruit, hold in the hand,
lift it to the nostrils and smell the perfume. Like that, heavy, sweet,
wild perfume. Always the same, year after year. They fetched high
prices too, Moisel told me. Arbutus place: Pleasants street: pleasant
old times. Must be without a flaw, he said. Coming all that way: Spain,
Gibraltar, Mediterranean, the Levant. Crates lined up on the quayside
at Jaffa, chap ticking them off in a book, navvies handling them
barefoot in soiled dungarees. There’s whatdoyoucallhim out of. How do
you? Doesn’t see. Chap you know just to salute bit of a bore. His back
is like that Norwegian captain’s. Wonder if I’ll meet him today.
Watering cart. To provoke the rain. On earth as it is in heaven.
A cloud began to cover the sun slowly, wholly. Grey. Far.
No, not like that. A barren land, bare waste. Vulcanic lake, the dead
sea: no fish, weedless, sunk deep in the earth. No wind could lift
those waves, grey metal, poisonous foggy waters. Brimstone they called
it raining down: the cities of the plain: Sodom, Gomorrah, Edom. All
dead names. A dead sea in a dead land, grey and old. Old now. It bore
the oldest, the first race. A bent hag crossed from Cassidy’s,
clutching a naggin bottle by the neck. The oldest people. Wandered far
away over all the earth, captivity to captivity, multiplying, dying,
being born everywhere. It lay there now. Now it could bear no more.
Dead: an old woman’s: the grey sunken cunt of the world.
Desolation.
Grey horror seared his flesh. Folding the page into his pocket he
turned into Eccles street, hurrying homeward. Cold oils slid along his
veins, chilling his blood: age crusting him with a salt cloak. Well, I
am here now. Yes, I am here now. Morning mouth bad images. Got up wrong
side of the bed. Must begin again those Sandow’s exercises. On the
hands down. Blotchy brown brick houses. Number eighty still unlet. Why
is that? Valuation is only twentyeight. Towers, Battersby, North,
MacArthur: parlour windows plastered with bills. Plasters on a sore
eye. To smell the gentle smoke of tea, fume of the pan, sizzling
butter. Be near her ample bedwarmed flesh. Yes, yes.
Quick warm sunlight came running from Berkeley road, swiftly, in slim
sandals, along the brightening footpath. Runs, she runs to meet me, a
girl with gold hair on the wind.
Two letters and a card lay on the hallfloor. He stooped and gathered
them. Mrs Marion Bloom. His quickened heart slowed at once. Bold hand.
Mrs Marion.
—Poldy!
Entering the bedroom he halfclosed his eyes and walked through warm
yellow twilight towards her tousled head.
—Who are the letters for?
He looked at them. Mullingar. Milly.
—A letter for me from Milly, he said carefully, and a card to you. And
a letter for you.
He laid her card and letter on the twill bedspread near the curve of
her knees.
—Do you want the blind up?
Letting the blind up by gentle tugs halfway his backward eye saw her
glance at the letter and tuck it under her pillow.
—That do? he asked, turning.
She was reading the card, propped on her elbow.
—She got the things, she said.
He waited till she had laid the card aside and curled herself back
slowly with a snug sigh.
—Hurry up with that tea, she said. I’m parched.
—The kettle is boiling, he said.
But he delayed to clear the chair: her striped petticoat, tossed soiled
linen: and lifted all in an armful on to the foot of the bed.
As he went down the kitchen stairs she called:
—Poldy!
—What?
—Scald the teapot.
On the boil sure enough: a plume of steam from the spout. He scalded
and rinsed out the teapot and put in four full spoons of tea, tilting
the kettle then to let the water flow in. Having set it to draw he took
off the kettle, crushed the pan flat on the live coals and watched the
lump of butter slide and melt. While he unwrapped the kidney the cat
mewed hungrily against him. Give her too much meat she won’t mouse. Say
they won’t eat pork. Kosher. Here. He let the bloodsmeared paper fall
to her and dropped the kidney amid the sizzling butter sauce. Pepper.
He sprinkled it through his fingers ringwise from the chipped eggcup.
Then he slit open his letter, glancing down the page and over. Thanks:
new tam: Mr Coghlan: lough Owel picnic: young student: Blazes Boylan’s
seaside girls.
The tea was drawn. He filled his own moustachecup, sham crown Derby,
smiling. Silly Milly’s birthday gift. Only five she was then. No, wait:
four. I gave her the amberoid necklace she broke. Putting pieces of
folded brown paper in the letterbox for her. He smiled, pouring.
     O, Milly Bloom, you are my darling.
     You are my lookingglass from night to morning.
     I’d rather have you without a farthing
     Than Katey Keogh with her ass and garden.
Poor old professor Goodwin. Dreadful old case. Still he was a courteous
old chap. Oldfashioned way he used to bow Molly off the platform. And
the little mirror in his silk hat. The night Milly brought it into the
parlour. O, look what I found in professor Goodwin’s hat! All we
laughed. Sex breaking out even then. Pert little piece she was.
He prodded a fork into the kidney and slapped it over: then fitted the
teapot on the tray. Its hump bumped as he took it up. Everything on it?
Bread and butter, four, sugar, spoon, her cream. Yes. He carried it
upstairs, his thumb hooked in the teapot handle.
Nudging the door open with his knee he carried the tray in and set it
on the chair by the bedhead.
—What a time you were! she said.
She set the brasses jingling as she raised herself briskly, an elbow on
the pillow. He looked calmly down on her bulk and between her large
soft bubs, sloping within her nightdress like a shegoat’s udder. The
warmth of her couched body rose on the air, mingling with the fragrance
of the tea she poured.
A strip of torn envelope peeped from under the dimpled pillow. In the
act of going he stayed to straighten the bedspread.
—Who was the letter from? he asked.
Bold hand. Marion.
—O, Boylan, she said. He’s bringing the programme.
—What are you singing?
—_Là ci darem_ with J. C. Doyle, she said, and _Love’s Old Sweet Song_.
Her full lips, drinking, smiled. Rather stale smell that incense leaves
next day. Like foul flowerwater.
—Would you like the window open a little?
She doubled a slice of bread into her mouth, asking:
—What time is the funeral?
—Eleven, I think, he answered. I didn’t see the paper.
Following the pointing of her finger he took up a leg of her soiled
drawers from the bed. No? Then, a twisted grey garter looped round a
stocking: rumpled, shiny sole.
—No: that book.
Other stocking. Her petticoat.
—It must have fell down, she said.
He felt here and there. _Voglio e non vorrei_. Wonder if she pronounces
that right: _voglio_. Not in the bed. Must have slid down. He stooped
and lifted the valance. The book, fallen, sprawled against the bulge of
the orangekeyed chamberpot.
—Show here, she said. I put a mark in it. There’s a word I wanted to
ask you.
She swallowed a draught of tea from her cup held by nothandle and,
having wiped her fingertips smartly on the blanket, began to search the
text with the hairpin till she reached the word.
—Met him what? he asked.
—Here, she said. What does that mean?
He leaned downward and read near her polished thumbnail.
—Metempsychosis?
—Yes. Who’s he when he’s at home?
—Metempsychosis, he said, frowning. It’s Greek: from the Greek. That
means the transmigration of souls.
—O, rocks! she said. Tell us in plain words.
He smiled, glancing askance at her mocking eyes. The same young eyes.
The first night after the charades. Dolphin’s Barn. He turned over the
smudged pages. _Ruby: the Pride of the Ring_. Hello. Illustration.
Fierce Italian with carriagewhip. Must be Ruby pride of the on the
floor naked. Sheet kindly lent. _The monster Maffei desisted and flung
his victim from him with an oath_. Cruelty behind it all. Doped
animals. Trapeze at Hengler’s. Had to look the other way. Mob gaping.
Break your neck and we’ll break our sides. Families of them. Bone them
young so they metamspychosis. That we live after death. Our souls. That
a man’s soul after he dies. Dignam’s soul...
—Did you finish it? he asked.
—Yes, she said. There’s nothing smutty in it. Is she in love with the
first fellow all the time?
—Never read it. Do you want another?
—Yes. Get another of Paul de Kock’s. Nice name he has.
She poured more tea into her cup, watching it flow sideways.
Must get that Capel street library book renewed or they’ll write to
Kearney, my guarantor. Reincarnation: that’s the word.
—Some people believe, he said, that we go on living in another body
after death, that we lived before. They call it reincarnation. That we
all lived before on the earth thousands of years ago or some other
planet. They say we have forgotten it. Some say they remember their
past lives.
The sluggish cream wound curdling spirals through her tea. Better
remind her of the word: metempsychosis. An example would be better. An
example?
The _Bath of the Nymph_ over the bed. Given away with the Easter number
of _Photo Bits_: Splendid masterpiece in art colours. Tea before you
put milk in. Not unlike her with her hair down: slimmer. Three and six
I gave for the frame. She said it would look nice over the bed. Naked
nymphs: Greece: and for instance all the people that lived then.
He turned the pages back.
—Metempsychosis, he said, is what the ancient Greeks called it. They
used to believe you could be changed into an animal or a tree, for
instance. What they called nymphs, for example.
Her spoon ceased to stir up the sugar. She gazed straight before her,
inhaling through her arched nostrils.
—There’s a smell of burn, she said. Did you leave anything on the fire?
—The kidney! he cried suddenly.
He fitted the book roughly into his inner pocket and, stubbing his toes
against the broken commode, hurried out towards the smell, stepping
hastily down the stairs with a flurried stork’s legs. Pungent smoke
shot up in an angry jet from a side of the pan. By prodding a prong of
the fork under the kidney he detached it and turned it turtle on its
back. Only a little burnt. He tossed it off the pan on to a plate and
let the scanty brown gravy trickle over it.
Cup of tea now. He sat down, cut and buttered a slice of the loaf. He
shore away the burnt flesh and flung it to the cat. Then he put a
forkful into his mouth, chewing with discernment the toothsome pliant
meat. Done to a turn. A mouthful of tea. Then he cut away dies of
bread, sopped one in the gravy and put it in his mouth. What was that
about some young student and a picnic? He creased out the letter at his
side, reading it slowly as he chewed, sopping another die of bread in
the gravy and raising it to his mouth.
Dearest Papli
Thanks ever so much for the lovely birthday present. It suits me
splendid. Everyone says I am quite the belle in my new tam. I got
mummy’s lovely box of creams and am writing. They are lovely. I am
getting on swimming in the photo business now. Mr Coghlan took one of
me and Mrs. Will send when developed. We did great biz yesterday. Fair
day and all the beef to the heels were in. We are going to lough Owel
on Monday with a few friends to make a scrap picnic. Give my love to
mummy and to yourself a big kiss and thanks. I hear them at the piano
downstairs. There is to be a concert in the Greville Arms on Saturday.
There is a young student comes here some evenings named Bannon his
cousins or something are big swells and he sings Boylan’s (I was on the
pop of writing Blazes Boylan’s) song about those seaside girls. Tell
him silly Milly sends my best respects. I must now close with fondest
love
                    Your fond daughter
                        Milly
P. S. Excuse bad writing am in hurry. Byby.
                        M.
Fifteen yesterday. Curious, fifteenth of the month too. Her first
birthday away from home. Separation. Remember the summer morning she
was born, running to knock up Mrs Thornton in Denzille street. Jolly
old woman. Lot of babies she must have helped into the world. She knew
from the first poor little Rudy wouldn’t live. Well, God is good, sir.
She knew at once. He would be eleven now if he had lived.
His vacant face stared pityingly at the postscript. Excuse bad writing.
Hurry. Piano downstairs. Coming out of her shell. Row with her in the
XL Café about the bracelet. Wouldn’t eat her cakes or speak or look.
Saucebox. He sopped other dies of bread in the gravy and ate piece
after piece of kidney. Twelve and six a week. Not much. Still, she
might do worse. Music hall stage. Young student. He drank a draught of
cooler tea to wash down his meal. Then he read the letter again: twice.
O, well: she knows how to mind herself. But if not? No, nothing has
happened. Of course it might. Wait in any case till it does. A wild
piece of goods. Her slim legs running up the staircase. Destiny.
Ripening now. Vain: very.
He smiled with troubled affection at the kitchen window. Day I caught
her in the street pinching her cheeks to make them red. Anemic a
little. Was given milk too long. On the _Erin’s King_ that day round
the Kish. Damned old tub pitching about. Not a bit funky. Her pale blue
scarf loose in the wind with her hair.
     All dimpled cheeks and curls,
     Your head it simply swirls.
Seaside girls. Torn envelope. Hands stuck in his trousers’ pockets,
jarvey off for the day, singing. Friend of the family. Swurls, he says.
Pier with lamps, summer evening, band.
     Those girls, those girls,
     Those lovely seaside girls.
Milly too. Young kisses: the first. Far away now past. Mrs Marion.
Reading, lying back now, counting the strands of her hair, smiling,
braiding.
A soft qualm, regret, flowed down his backbone, increasing. Will
happen, yes. Prevent. Useless: can’t move. Girl’s sweet light lips.
Will happen too. He felt the flowing qualm spread over him. Useless to
move now. Lips kissed, kissing, kissed. Full gluey woman’s lips.
Better where she is down there: away. Occupy her. Wanted a dog to pass
the time. Might take a trip down there. August bank holiday, only two
and six return. Six weeks off, however. Might work a press pass. Or
through M’Coy.
The cat, having cleaned all her fur, returned to the meatstained paper,
nosed at it and stalked to the door. She looked back at him, mewing.
Wants to go out. Wait before a door sometime it will open. Let her
wait. Has the fidgets. Electric. Thunder in the air. Was washing at her
ear with her back to the fire too.
He felt heavy, full: then a gentle loosening of his bowels. He stood
up, undoing the waistband of his trousers. The cat mewed to him.
—Miaow! he said in answer. Wait till I’m ready.
Heaviness: hot day coming. Too much trouble to fag up the stairs to the
landing.
A paper. He liked to read at stool. Hope no ape comes knocking just as
I’m.
In the tabledrawer he found an old number of _Titbits_. He folded it
under his armpit, went to the door and opened it. The cat went up in
soft bounds. Ah, wanted to go upstairs, curl up in a ball on the bed.
Listening, he heard her voice:
—Come, come, pussy. Come.
He went out through the backdoor into the garden: stood to listen
towards the next garden. No sound. Perhaps hanging clothes out to dry.
The maid was in the garden. Fine morning.
He bent down to regard a lean file of spearmint growing by the wall.
Make a summerhouse here. Scarlet runners. Virginia creepers. Want to
manure the whole place over, scabby soil. A coat of liver of sulphur.
All soil like that without dung. Household slops. Loam, what is this
that is? The hens in the next garden: their droppings are very good top
dressing. Best of all though are the cattle, especially when they are
fed on those oilcakes. Mulch of dung. Best thing to clean ladies’ kid
gloves. Dirty cleans. Ashes too. Reclaim the whole place. Grow peas in
that corner there. Lettuce. Always have fresh greens then. Still
gardens have their drawbacks. That bee or bluebottle here Whitmonday.
He walked on. Where is my hat, by the way? Must have put it back on the
peg. Or hanging up on the floor. Funny I don’t remember that. Hallstand
too full. Four umbrellas, her raincloak. Picking up the letters.
Drago’s shopbell ringing. Queer I was just thinking that moment. Brown
brillantined hair over his collar. Just had a wash and brushup. Wonder
have I time for a bath this morning. Tara street. Chap in the paybox
there got away James Stephens, they say. O’Brien.
Deep voice that fellow Dlugacz has. Agendath what is it? Now, my miss.
Enthusiast.
He kicked open the crazy door of the jakes. Better be careful not to
get these trousers dirty for the funeral. He went in, bowing his head
under the low lintel. Leaving the door ajar, amid the stench of mouldy
limewash and stale cobwebs he undid his braces. Before sitting down he
peered through a chink up at the nextdoor windows. The king was in his
countinghouse. Nobody.
Asquat on the cuckstool he folded out his paper, turning its pages over
on his bared knees. Something new and easy. No great hurry. Keep it a
bit. Our prize titbit: _Matcham’s Masterstroke_. Written by Mr Philip
Beaufoy, Playgoers’ Club, London. Payment at the rate of one guinea a
column has been made to the writer. Three and a half. Three pounds
three. Three pounds, thirteen and six.
Quietly he read, restraining himself, the first column and, yielding
but resisting, began the second. Midway, his last resistance yielding,
he allowed his bowels to ease themselves quietly as he read, reading
still patiently that slight constipation of yesterday quite gone. Hope
it’s not too big bring on piles again. No, just right. So. Ah! Costive.
One tabloid of cascara sagrada. Life might be so. It did not move or
touch him but it was something quick and neat. Print anything now.
Silly season. He read on, seated calm above his own rising smell. Neat
certainly. _Matcham often thinks of the masterstroke by which he won
the laughing witch who now_. Begins and ends morally. _Hand in hand_.
Smart. He glanced back through what he had read and, while feeling his
water flow quietly, he envied kindly Mr Beaufoy who had written it and
received payment of three pounds, thirteen and six.
Might manage a sketch. By Mr and Mrs L. M. Bloom. Invent a story for
some proverb. Which? Time I used to try jotting down on my cuff what
she said dressing. Dislike dressing together. Nicked myself shaving.
Biting her nether lip, hooking the placket of her skirt. Timing her.
9.15. Did Roberts pay you yet? 9.20. What had Gretta Conroy on? 9.23.
What possessed me to buy this comb? 9.24. I’m swelled after that
cabbage. A speck of dust on the patent leather of her boot.
Rubbing smartly in turn each welt against her stockinged calf. Morning
after the bazaar dance when May’s band played Ponchielli’s dance of the
hours. Explain that: morning hours, noon, then evening coming on, then
night hours. Washing her teeth. That was the first night. Her head
dancing. Her fansticks clicking. Is that Boylan well off? He has money.
Why? I noticed he had a good rich smell off his breath dancing. No use
humming then. Allude to it. Strange kind of music that last night. The
mirror was in shadow. She rubbed her handglass briskly on her woollen
vest against her full wagging bub. Peering into it. Lines in her eyes.
It wouldn’t pan out somehow.
Evening hours, girls in grey gauze. Night hours then: black with
daggers and eyemasks. Poetical idea: pink, then golden, then grey, then
black. Still, true to life also. Day: then the night.
He tore away half the prize story sharply and wiped himself with it.
Then he girded up his trousers, braced and buttoned himself. He pulled
back the jerky shaky door of the jakes and came forth from the gloom
into the air.
In the bright light, lightened and cooled in limb, he eyed carefully
his black trousers: the ends, the knees, the houghs of the knees. What
time is the funeral? Better find out in the paper.
A creak and a dark whirr in the air high up. The bells of George’s
church. They tolled the hour: loud dark iron.
     Heigho! Heigho!
     Heigho! Heigho!
     Heigho! Heigho!
Quarter to. There again: the overtone following through the air. A
third.
Poor Dignam!
[ 5 ]
By lorries along sir John Rogerson’s quay Mr Bloom walked soberly, past
Windmill lane, Leask’s the linseed crusher, the postal telegraph
office. Could have given that address too. And past the sailors’ home.
He turned from the morning noises of the quayside and walked through
Lime street. By Brady’s cottages a boy for the skins lolled, his bucket
of offal linked, smoking a chewed fagbutt. A smaller girl with scars of
eczema on her forehead eyed him, listlessly holding her battered
caskhoop. Tell him if he smokes he won’t grow. O let him! His life
isn’t such a bed of roses. Waiting outside pubs to bring da home. Come
home to ma, da. Slack hour: won’t be many there. He crossed Townsend
street, passed the frowning face of Bethel. El, yes: house of: Aleph,
Beth. And past Nichols’ the undertaker. At eleven it is. Time enough.
Daresay Corny Kelleher bagged the job for O’Neill’s. Singing with his
eyes shut. Corny. Met her once in the park. In the dark. What a lark.
Police tout. Her name and address she then told with my tooraloom
tooraloom tay. O, surely he bagged it. Bury him cheap in a
whatyoumaycall. With my tooraloom, tooraloom, tooraloom, tooraloom.
In Westland row he halted before the window of the Belfast and Oriental
Tea Company and read the legends of leadpapered packets: choice blend,
finest quality, family tea. Rather warm. Tea. Must get some from Tom
Kernan. Couldn’t ask him at a funeral, though. While his eyes still
read blandly he took off his hat quietly inhaling his hairoil and sent
his right hand with slow grace over his brow and hair. Very warm
morning. Under their dropped lids his eyes found the tiny bow of the
leather headband inside his high grade ha. Just there. His right hand
came down into the bowl of his hat. His fingers found quickly a card
behind the headband and transferred it to his waistcoat pocket.
So warm. His right hand once more more slowly went over his brow and
hair. Then he put on his hat again, relieved: and read again: choice
blend, made of the finest Ceylon brands. The far east. Lovely spot it
must be: the garden of the world, big lazy leaves to float about on,
cactuses, flowery meads, snaky lianas they call them. Wonder is it like
that. Those Cinghalese lobbing about in the sun in _dolce far niente_,
not doing a hand’s turn all day. Sleep six months out of twelve. Too
hot to quarrel. Influence of the climate. Lethargy. Flowers of
idleness. The air feeds most. Azotes. Hothouse in Botanic gardens.
Sensitive plants. Waterlilies. Petals too tired to. Sleeping sickness
in the air. Walk on roseleaves. Imagine trying to eat tripe and
cowheel. Where was the chap I saw in that picture somewhere? Ah yes, in
the dead sea floating on his back, reading a book with a parasol open.
Couldn’t sink if you tried: so thick with salt. Because the weight of
the water, no, the weight of the body in the water is equal to the
weight of the what? Or is it the volume is equal to the weight? It’s a
law something like that. Vance in High school cracking his
fingerjoints, teaching. The college curriculum. Cracking curriculum.
What is weight really when you say the weight? Thirtytwo feet per
second per second. Law of falling bodies: per second per second. They
all fall to the ground. The earth. It’s the force of gravity of the
earth is the weight.
He turned away and sauntered across the road. How did she walk with her
sausages? Like that something. As he walked he took the folded
_Freeman_ from his sidepocket, unfolded it, rolled it lengthwise in a
baton and tapped it at each sauntering step against his trouserleg.
Careless air: just drop in to see. Per second per second. Per second
for every second it means. From the curbstone he darted a keen glance
through the door of the postoffice. Too late box. Post here. No-one.
In.
He handed the card through the brass grill.
—Are there any letters for me? he asked.
While the postmistress searched a pigeonhole he gazed at the recruiting
poster with soldiers of all arms on parade: and held the tip of his
baton against his nostrils, smelling freshprinted rag paper. No answer
probably. Went too far last time.
The postmistress handed him back through the grill his card with a
letter. He thanked her and glanced rapidly at the typed envelope.
Henry Flower Esq,
c/o P. O. Westland Row,
            City.
Answered anyhow. He slipped card and letter into his sidepocket,
reviewing again the soldiers on parade. Where’s old Tweedy’s regiment?
Castoff soldier. There: bearskin cap and hackle plume. No, he’s a
grenadier. Pointed cuffs. There he is: royal Dublin fusiliers.
Redcoats. Too showy. That must be why the women go after them. Uniform.
Easier to enlist and drill. Maud Gonne’s letter about taking them off
O’Connell street at night: disgrace to our Irish capital. Griffith’s
paper is on the same tack now: an army rotten with venereal disease:
overseas or halfseasover empire. Half baked they look: hypnotised like.
Eyes front. Mark time. Table: able. Bed: ed. The King’s own. Never see
him dressed up as a fireman or a bobby. A mason, yes.
He strolled out of the postoffice and turned to the right. Talk: as if
that would mend matters. His hand went into his pocket and a forefinger
felt its way under the flap of the envelope, ripping it open in jerks.
Women will pay a lot of heed, I don’t think. His fingers drew forth the
letter the letter and crumpled the envelope in his pocket. Something
pinned on: photo perhaps. Hair? No.
M’Coy. Get rid of him quickly. Take me out of my way. Hate company when
you.
—Hello, Bloom. Where are you off to?
—Hello, M’Coy. Nowhere in particular.
—How’s the body?
—Fine. How are you?
—Just keeping alive, M’Coy said.
His eyes on the black tie and clothes he asked with low respect:
—Is there any... no trouble I hope? I see you’re...
—O, no, Mr Bloom said. Poor Dignam, you know. The funeral is today.
—To be sure, poor fellow. So it is. What time?
A photo it isn’t. A badge maybe.
—E...eleven, Mr Bloom answered.
—I must try to get out there, M’Coy said. Eleven, is it? I only heard
it last night. Who was telling me? Holohan. You know Hoppy?
—I know.
Mr Bloom gazed across the road at the outsider drawn up before the door
of the Grosvenor. The porter hoisted the valise up on the well. She
stood still, waiting, while the man, husband, brother, like her,
searched his pockets for change. Stylish kind of coat with that roll
collar, warm for a day like this, looks like blanketcloth. Careless
stand of her with her hands in those patch pockets. Like that haughty
creature at the polo match. Women all for caste till you touch the
spot. Handsome is and handsome does. Reserved about to yield. The
honourable Mrs and Brutus is an honourable man. Possess her once take
the starch out of her.
—I was with Bob Doran, he’s on one of his periodical bends, and what do
you call him Bantam Lyons. Just down there in Conway’s we were.
Doran Lyons in Conway’s. She raised a gloved hand to her hair. In came
Hoppy. Having a wet. Drawing back his head and gazing far from beneath
his vailed eyelids he saw the bright fawn skin shine in the glare, the
braided drums. Clearly I can see today. Moisture about gives long sight
perhaps. Talking of one thing or another. Lady’s hand. Which side will
she get up?
—And he said: _Sad thing about our poor friend Paddy! What Paddy?_ I
said. _Poor little Paddy Dignam_, he said.
Off to the country: Broadstone probably. High brown boots with laces
dangling. Wellturned foot. What is he foostering over that change for?
Sees me looking. Eye out for other fellow always. Good fallback. Two
strings to her bow.
—_Why?_ I said. _What’s wrong with him?_ I said.
Proud: rich: silk stockings.
—Yes, Mr Bloom said.
He moved a little to the side of M’Coy’s talking head. Getting up in a
minute.
—_What’s wrong with him_? He said. _He’s dead_, he said. And, faith, he
filled up. _Is it Paddy Dignam_? I said. I couldn’t believe it when I
heard it. I was with him no later than Friday last or Thursday was it
in the Arch. _Yes,_ he said. _He’s gone. He died on Monday, poor
fellow_.
Watch! Watch! Silk flash rich stockings white. Watch!
A heavy tramcar honking its gong slewed between.
Lost it. Curse your noisy pugnose. Feels locked out of it. Paradise and
the peri. Always happening like that. The very moment. Girl in Eustace
street hallway Monday was it settling her garter. Her friend covering
the display of. _Esprit de corps_. Well, what are you gaping at?
—Yes, yes, Mr Bloom said after a dull sigh. Another gone.
—One of the best, M’Coy said.
The tram passed. They drove off towards the Loop Line bridge, her rich
gloved hand on the steel grip. Flicker, flicker: the laceflare of her
hat in the sun: flicker, flick.
—Wife well, I suppose? M’Coy’s changed voice said.
—O, yes, Mr Bloom said. Tiptop, thanks.
He unrolled the newspaper baton idly and read idly:
     What is home without
     Plumtree’s Potted Meat?
     Incomplete.
     With it an abode of bliss.
—My missus has just got an engagement. At least it’s not settled yet.
Valise tack again. By the way no harm. I’m off that, thanks.
Mr Bloom turned his largelidded eyes with unhasty friendliness.
—My wife too, he said. She’s going to sing at a swagger affair in the
Ulster Hall, Belfast, on the twentyfifth.
—That so? M’Coy said. Glad to hear that, old man. Who’s getting it up?
Mrs Marion Bloom. Not up yet. Queen was in her bedroom eating bread
and. No book. Blackened court cards laid along her thigh by sevens.
Dark lady and fair man. Letter. Cat furry black ball. Torn strip of
envelope.
     Love’s
     Old
     Sweet
     Song
     Comes lo-ove’s old...
—It’s a kind of a tour, don’t you see, Mr Bloom said thoughtfully.
_Sweeeet song_. There’s a committee formed. Part shares and part
profits.
M’Coy nodded, picking at his moustache stubble.
—O, well, he said. That’s good news.
He moved to go.
—Well, glad to see you looking fit, he said. Meet you knocking around.
—Yes, Mr Bloom said.
—Tell you what, M’Coy said. You might put down my name at the funeral,
will you? I’d like to go but I mightn’t be able, you see. There’s a
drowning case at Sandycove may turn up and then the coroner and myself
would have to go down if the body is found. You just shove in my name
if I’m not there, will you?
—I’ll do that, Mr Bloom said, moving to get off. That’ll be all right.
—Right, M’Coy said brightly. Thanks, old man. I’d go if I possibly
could. Well, tolloll. Just C. P. M’Coy will do.
—That will be done, Mr Bloom answered firmly.
Didn’t catch me napping that wheeze. The quick touch. Soft mark. I’d
like my job. Valise I have a particular fancy for. Leather. Capped
corners, rivetted edges, double action lever lock. Bob Cowley lent him
his for the Wicklow regatta concert last year and never heard tidings
of it from that good day to this.
Mr Bloom, strolling towards Brunswick street, smiled. My missus has
just got an. Reedy freckled soprano. Cheeseparing nose. Nice enough in
its way: for a little ballad. No guts in it. You and me, don’t you
know: in the same boat. Softsoaping. Give you the needle that would.
Can’t he hear the difference? Think he’s that way inclined a bit.
Against my grain somehow. Thought that Belfast would fetch him. I hope
that smallpox up there doesn’t get worse. Suppose she wouldn’t let
herself be vaccinated again. Your wife and my wife.
Wonder is he pimping after me?
Mr Bloom stood at the corner, his eyes wandering over the multicoloured
hoardings. Cantrell and Cochrane’s Ginger Ale (Aromatic). Clery’s
Summer Sale. No, he’s going on straight. Hello. _Leah_ tonight. Mrs
Bandmann Palmer. Like to see her again in that. _Hamlet_ she played
last night. Male impersonator. Perhaps he was a woman. Why Ophelia
committed suicide. Poor papa! How he used to talk of Kate Bateman in
that. Outside the Adelphi in London waited all the afternoon to get in.
Year before I was born that was: sixtyfive. And Ristori in Vienna. What
is this the right name is? By Mosenthal it is. Rachel, is it? No. The
scene he was always talking about where the old blind Abraham
recognises the voice and puts his fingers on his face.
Nathan’s voice! His son’s voice! I hear the voice of Nathan who left
his father to die of grief and misery in my arms, who left the house of
his father and left the God of his father.
Every word is so deep, Leopold.
Poor papa! Poor man! I’m glad I didn’t go into the room to look at his
face. That day! O, dear! O, dear! Ffoo! Well, perhaps it was best for
him.
Mr Bloom went round the corner and passed the drooping nags of the
hazard. No use thinking of it any more. Nosebag time. Wish I hadn’t met
that M’Coy fellow.
He came nearer and heard a crunching of gilded oats, the gently
champing teeth. Their full buck eyes regarded him as he went by, amid
the sweet oaten reek of horsepiss. Their Eldorado. Poor jugginses! Damn
all they know or care about anything with their long noses stuck in
nosebags. Too full for words. Still they get their feed all right and
their doss. Gelded too: a stump of black guttapercha wagging limp
between their haunches. Might be happy all the same that way. Good poor
brutes they look. Still their neigh can be very irritating.
He drew the letter from his pocket and folded it into the newspaper he
carried. Might just walk into her here. The lane is safer.
He passed the cabman’s shelter. Curious the life of drifting cabbies.
All weathers, all places, time or setdown, no will of their own.
_Voglio e non_. Like to give them an odd cigarette. Sociable. Shout a
few flying syllables as they pass. He hummed:
     Là ci darem la mano
     La la lala la la.
He turned into Cumberland street and, going on some paces, halted in
the lee of the station wall. No-one. Meade’s timberyard. Piled balks.
Ruins and tenements. With careful tread he passed over a hopscotch
court with its forgotten pickeystone. Not a sinner. Near the timberyard
a squatted child at marbles, alone, shooting the taw with a cunnythumb.
A wise tabby, a blinking sphinx, watched from her warm sill. Pity to
disturb them. Mohammed cut a piece out of his mantle not to wake her.
Open it. And once I played marbles when I went to that old dame’s
school. She liked mignonette. Mrs Ellis’s. And Mr? He opened the letter
within the newspaper.
A flower. I think it’s a. A yellow flower with flattened petals. Not
annoyed then? What does she say?
Dear Henry
I got your last letter to me and thank you very much for it. I am sorry
you did not like my last letter. Why did you enclose the stamps? I am
awfully angry with you. I do wish I could punish you for that. I called
you naughty boy because I do not like that other world. Please tell me
what is the real meaning of that word? Are you not happy in your home
you poor little naughty boy? I do wish I could do something for you.
Please tell me what you think of poor me. I often think of the
beautiful name you have. Dear Henry, when will we meet? I think of you
so often you have no idea. I have never felt myself so much drawn to a
man as you. I feel so bad about. Please write me a long letter and tell
me more. Remember if you do not I will punish you. So now you know what
I will do to you, you naughty boy, if you do not wrote. O how I long to
meet you. Henry dear, do not deny my request before my patience are
exhausted. Then I will tell you all. Goodbye now, naughty darling, I
have such a bad headache. today. and write _by return_ to your longing
Martha
P. S. Do tell me what kind of perfume does your wife use. I want to
know.
He tore the flower gravely from its pinhold smelt its almost no smell
and placed it in his heart pocket. Language of flowers. They like it
because no-one can hear. Or a poison bouquet to strike him down. Then
walking slowly forward he read the letter again, murmuring here and
there a word. Angry tulips with you darling manflower punish your
cactus if you don’t please poor forgetmenot how I long violets to dear
roses when we soon anemone meet all naughty nightstalk wife Martha’s
perfume. Having read it all he took it from the newspaper and put it
back in his sidepocket.
Weak joy opened his lips. Changed since the first letter. Wonder did
she wrote it herself. Doing the indignant: a girl of good family like
me, respectable character. Could meet one Sunday after the rosary.
Thank you: not having any. Usual love scrimmage. Then running round
corners. Bad as a row with Molly. Cigar has a cooling effect. Narcotic.
Go further next time. Naughty boy: punish: afraid of words, of course.
Brutal, why not? Try it anyhow. A bit at a time.
Fingering still the letter in his pocket he drew the pin out of it.
Common pin, eh? He threw it on the road. Out of her clothes somewhere:
pinned together. Queer the number of pins they always have. No roses
without thorns.
Flat Dublin voices bawled in his head. Those two sluts that night in
the Coombe, linked together in the rain.
     O, Mairy lost the pin of her drawers.
     She didn’t know what to do
     To keep it up,
     To keep it up.
It? Them. Such a bad headache. Has her roses probably. Or sitting all
day typing. Eyefocus bad for stomach nerves. What perfume does your
wife use. Now could you make out a thing like that?
     To keep it up.
Martha, Mary. I saw that picture somewhere I forget now old master or
faked for money. He is sitting in their house, talking. Mysterious.
Also the two sluts in the Coombe would listen.
     To keep it up.
Nice kind of evening feeling. No more wandering about. Just loll there:
quiet dusk: let everything rip. Forget. Tell about places you have
been, strange customs. The other one, jar on her head, was getting the
supper: fruit, olives, lovely cool water out of a well, stonecold like
the hole in the wall at Ashtown. Must carry a paper goblet next time I
go to the trottingmatches. She listens with big dark soft eyes. Tell
her: more and more: all. Then a sigh: silence. Long long long rest.
Going under the railway arch he took out the envelope, tore it swiftly
in shreds and scattered them towards the road. The shreds fluttered
away, sank in the dank air: a white flutter, then all sank.
Henry Flower. You could tear up a cheque for a hundred pounds in the
same way. Simple bit of paper. Lord Iveagh once cashed a sevenfigure
cheque for a million in the bank of Ireland. Shows you the money to be
made out of porter. Still the other brother lord Ardilaun has to change
his shirt four times a day, they say. Skin breeds lice or vermin. A
million pounds, wait a moment. Twopence a pint, fourpence a quart,
eightpence a gallon of porter, no, one and fourpence a gallon of
porter. One and four into twenty: fifteen about. Yes, exactly. Fifteen
millions of barrels of porter.
What am I saying barrels? Gallons. About a million barrels all the
same.
An incoming train clanked heavily above his head, coach after coach.
Barrels bumped in his head: dull porter slopped and churned inside. The
bungholes sprang open and a huge dull flood leaked out, flowing
together, winding through mudflats all over the level land, a lazy
pooling swirl of liquor bearing along wideleaved flowers of its froth.
He had reached the open backdoor of All Hallows. Stepping into the
porch he doffed his hat, took the card from his pocket and tucked it
again behind the leather headband. Damn it. I might have tried to work
M’Coy for a pass to Mullingar.
Same notice on the door. Sermon by the very reverend John Conmee S. J.
on saint Peter Claver S. J. and the African Mission. Prayers for the
conversion of Gladstone they had too when he was almost unconscious.
The protestants are the same. Convert Dr William J. Walsh D.D. to the
true religion. Save China’s millions. Wonder how they explain it to the
heathen Chinee. Prefer an ounce of opium. Celestials. Rank heresy for
them. Buddha their god lying on his side in the museum. Taking it easy
with hand under his cheek. Josssticks burning. Not like Ecce Homo.
Crown of thorns and cross. Clever idea Saint Patrick the shamrock.
Chopsticks? Conmee: Martin Cunningham knows him: distinguishedlooking.
Sorry I didn’t work him about getting Molly into the choir instead of
that Father Farley who looked a fool but wasn’t. They’re taught that.
He’s not going out in bluey specs with the sweat rolling off him to
baptise blacks, is he? The glasses would take their fancy, flashing.
Like to see them sitting round in a ring with blub lips, entranced,
listening. Still life. Lap it up like milk, I suppose.
The cold smell of sacred stone called him. He trod the worn steps,
pushed the swingdoor and entered softly by the rere.
Something going on: some sodality. Pity so empty. Nice discreet place
to be next some girl. Who is my neighbour? Jammed by the hour to slow
music. That woman at midnight mass. Seventh heaven. Women knelt in the
benches with crimson halters round their necks, heads bowed. A batch
knelt at the altarrails. The priest went along by them, murmuring,
holding the thing in his hands. He stopped at each, took out a
communion, shook a drop or two (are they in water?) off it and put it
neatly into her mouth. Her hat and head sank. Then the next one. Her
hat sank at once. Then the next one: a small old woman. The priest bent
down to put it into her mouth, murmuring all the time. Latin. The next
one. Shut your eyes and open your mouth. What? _Corpus:_ body. Corpse.
Good idea the Latin. Stupefies them first. Hospice for the dying. They
don’t seem to chew it: only swallow it down. Rum idea: eating bits of a
corpse. Why the cannibals cotton to it.
He stood aside watching their blind masks pass down the aisle, one by
one, and seek their places. He approached a bench and seated himself in
its corner, nursing his hat and newspaper. These pots we have to wear.
We ought to have hats modelled on our heads. They were about him here
and there, with heads still bowed in their crimson halters, waiting for
it to melt in their stomachs. Something like those mazzoth: it’s that
sort of bread: unleavened shewbread. Look at them. Now I bet it makes
them feel happy. Lollipop. It does. Yes, bread of angels it’s called.
There’s a big idea behind it, kind of kingdom of God is within you
feel. First communicants. Hokypoky penny a lump. Then feel all like one
family party, same in the theatre, all in the same swim. They do. I’m
sure of that. Not so lonely. In our confraternity. Then come out a bit
spreeish. Let off steam. Thing is if you really believe in it. Lourdes
cure, waters of oblivion, and the Knock apparition, statues bleeding.
Old fellow asleep near that confessionbox. Hence those snores. Blind
faith. Safe in the arms of kingdom come. Lulls all pain. Wake this time
next year.
He saw the priest stow the communion cup away, well in, and kneel an
instant before it, showing a large grey bootsole from under the lace
affair he had on. Suppose he lost the pin of his. He wouldn’t know what
to do to. Bald spot behind. Letters on his back: I.N.R.I? No: I.H.S.
Molly told me one time I asked her. I have sinned: or no: I have
suffered, it is. And the other one? Iron nails ran in.
Meet one Sunday after the rosary. Do not deny my request. Turn up with
a veil and black bag. Dusk and the light behind her. She might be here
with a ribbon round her neck and do the other thing all the same on the
sly. Their character. That fellow that turned queen’s evidence on the
invincibles he used to receive the, Carey was his name, the communion
every morning. This very church. Peter Carey, yes. No, Peter Claver I
am thinking of. Denis Carey. And just imagine that. Wife and six
children at home. And plotting that murder all the time. Those
crawthumpers, now that’s a good name for them, there’s always something
shiftylooking about them. They’re not straight men of business either.
O, no, she’s not here: the flower: no, no. By the way, did I tear up
that envelope? Yes: under the bridge.
The priest was rinsing out the chalice: then he tossed off the dregs
smartly. Wine. Makes it more aristocratic than for example if he drank
what they are used to Guinness’s porter or some temperance beverage
Wheatley’s Dublin hop bitters or Cantrell and Cochrane’s ginger ale
(aromatic). Doesn’t give them any of it: shew wine: only the other.
Cold comfort. Pious fraud but quite right: otherwise they’d have one
old booser worse than another coming along, cadging for a drink. Queer
the whole atmosphere of the. Quite right. Perfectly right that is.
Mr Bloom looked back towards the choir. Not going to be any music.
Pity. Who has the organ here I wonder? Old Glynn he knew how to make
that instrument talk, the _vibrato_: fifty pounds a year they say he
had in Gardiner street. Molly was in fine voice that day, the _Stabat
Mater_ of Rossini. Father Bernard Vaughan’s sermon first. Christ or
Pilate? Christ, but don’t keep us all night over it. Music they wanted.
Footdrill stopped. Could hear a pin drop. I told her to pitch her voice
against that corner. I could feel the thrill in the air, the full, the
people looking up:
_Quis est homo._
Some of that old sacred music splendid. Mercadante: seven last words.
Mozart’s twelfth mass: _Gloria_ in that. Those old popes keen on music,
on art and statues and pictures of all kinds. Palestrina for example
too. They had a gay old time while it lasted. Healthy too, chanting,
regular hours, then brew liqueurs. Benedictine. Green Chartreuse.
Still, having eunuchs in their choir that was coming it a bit thick.
What kind of voice is it? Must be curious to hear after their own
strong basses. Connoisseurs. Suppose they wouldn’t feel anything after.
Kind of a placid. No worry. Fall into flesh, don’t they? Gluttons,
tall, long legs. Who knows? Eunuch. One way out of it.
He saw the priest bend down and kiss the altar and then face about and
bless all the people. All crossed themselves and stood up. Mr Bloom
glanced about him and then stood up, looking over the risen hats. Stand
up at the gospel of course. Then all settled down on their knees again
and he sat back quietly in his bench. The priest came down from the
altar, holding the thing out from him, and he and the massboy answered
each other in Latin. Then the priest knelt down and began to read off a
card:
—O God, our refuge and our strength...
Mr Bloom put his face forward to catch the words. English. Throw them
the bone. I remember slightly. How long since your last mass? Glorious
and immaculate virgin. Joseph, her spouse. Peter and Paul. More
interesting if you understood what it was all about. Wonderful
organisation certainly, goes like clockwork. Confession. Everyone wants
to. Then I will tell you all. Penance. Punish me, please. Great weapon
in their hands. More than doctor or solicitor. Woman dying to. And I
schschschschschsch. And did you chachachachacha? And why did you? Look
down at her ring to find an excuse. Whispering gallery walls have ears.
Husband learn to his surprise. God’s little joke. Then out she comes.
Repentance skindeep. Lovely shame. Pray at an altar. Hail Mary and Holy
Mary. Flowers, incense, candles melting. Hide her blushes. Salvation
army blatant imitation. Reformed prostitute will address the meeting.
How I found the Lord. Squareheaded chaps those must be in Rome: they
work the whole show. And don’t they rake in the money too? Bequests
also: to the P.P. for the time being in his absolute discretion. Masses
for the repose of my soul to be said publicly with open doors.
Monasteries and convents. The priest in that Fermanagh will case in the
witnessbox. No browbeating him. He had his answer pat for everything.
Liberty and exaltation of our holy mother the church. The doctors of
the church: they mapped out the whole theology of it.
The priest prayed:
—Blessed Michael, archangel, defend us in the hour of conflict. Be our
safeguard against the wickedness and snares of the devil (may God
restrain him, we humbly pray!): and do thou, O prince of the heavenly
host, by the power of God thrust Satan down to hell and with him those
other wicked spirits who wander through the world for the ruin of
souls.
The priest and the massboy stood up and walked off. All over. The women
remained behind: thanksgiving.
Better be shoving along. Brother Buzz. Come around with the plate
perhaps. Pay your Easter duty.
He stood up. Hello. Were those two buttons of my waistcoat open all the
time? Women enjoy it. Never tell you. But we. Excuse, miss, there’s a
(whh!) just a (whh!) fluff. Or their skirt behind, placket unhooked.
Glimpses of the moon. Annoyed if you don’t. Why didn’t you tell me
before. Still like you better untidy. Good job it wasn’t farther south.
He passed, discreetly buttoning, down the aisle and out through the
main door into the light. He stood a moment unseeing by the cold black
marble bowl while before him and behind two worshippers dipped furtive
hands in the low tide of holy water. Trams: a car of Prescott’s
dyeworks: a widow in her weeds. Notice because I’m in mourning myself.
He covered himself. How goes the time? Quarter past. Time enough yet.
Better get that lotion made up. Where is this? Ah yes, the last time.
Sweny’s in Lincoln place. Chemists rarely move. Their green and gold
beaconjars too heavy to stir. Hamilton Long’s, founded in the year of
the flood. Huguenot churchyard near there. Visit some day.
He walked southward along Westland row. But the recipe is in the other
trousers. O, and I forgot that latchkey too. Bore this funeral affair.
O well, poor fellow, it’s not his fault. When was it I got it made up
last? Wait. I changed a sovereign I remember. First of the month it
must have been or the second. O, he can look it up in the prescriptions
book.
The chemist turned back page after page. Sandy shrivelled smell he
seems to have. Shrunken skull. And old. Quest for the philosopher’s
stone. The alchemists. Drugs age you after mental excitement. Lethargy
then. Why? Reaction. A lifetime in a night. Gradually changes your
character. Living all the day among herbs, ointments, disinfectants.
All his alabaster lilypots. Mortar and pestle. Aq. Dist. Fol. Laur. Te
Virid. Smell almost cure you like the dentist’s doorbell. Doctor Whack.
He ought to physic himself a bit. Electuary or emulsion. The first
fellow that picked an herb to cure himself had a bit of pluck. Simples.
Want to be careful. Enough stuff here to chloroform you. Test: turns
blue litmus paper red. Chloroform. Overdose of laudanum. Sleeping
draughts. Lovephiltres. Paragoric poppysyrup bad for cough. Clogs the
pores or the phlegm. Poisons the only cures. Remedy where you least
expect it. Clever of nature.
—About a fortnight ago, sir?
—Yes, Mr Bloom said.
He waited by the counter, inhaling slowly the keen reek of drugs, the
dusty dry smell of sponges and loofahs. Lot of time taken up telling
your aches and pains.
—Sweet almond oil and tincture of benzoin, Mr Bloom said, and then
orangeflower water...
It certainly did make her skin so delicate white like wax.
—And white wax also, he said.
Brings out the darkness of her eyes. Looking at me, the sheet up to her
eyes, Spanish, smelling herself, when I was fixing the links in my
cuffs. Those homely recipes are often the best: strawberries for the
teeth: nettles and rainwater: oatmeal they say steeped in buttermilk.
Skinfood. One of the old queen’s sons, duke of Albany was it? had only
one skin. Leopold, yes. Three we have. Warts, bunions and pimples to
make it worse. But you want a perfume too. What perfume does your?
_Peau d’Espagne_. That orangeflower water is so fresh. Nice smell these
soaps have. Pure curd soap. Time to get a bath round the corner.
Hammam. Turkish. Massage. Dirt gets rolled up in your navel. Nicer if a
nice girl did it. Also I think I. Yes I. Do it in the bath. Curious
longing I. Water to water. Combine business with pleasure. Pity no time
for massage. Feel fresh then all the day. Funeral be rather glum.
—Yes, sir, the chemist said. That was two and nine. Have you brought a
bottle?
—No, Mr Bloom said. Make it up, please. I’ll call later in the day and
I’ll take one of these soaps. How much are they?
—Fourpence, sir.
Mr Bloom raised a cake to his nostrils. Sweet lemony wax.
—I’ll take this one, he said. That makes three and a penny.
—Yes, sir, the chemist said. You can pay all together, sir, when you
come back.
—Good, Mr Bloom said.
He strolled out of the shop, the newspaper baton under his armpit, the
coolwrappered soap in his left hand.
At his armpit Bantam Lyons’ voice and hand said:
—Hello, Bloom. What’s the best news? Is that today’s? Show us a minute.
Shaved off his moustache again, by Jove! Long cold upper lip. To look
younger. He does look balmy. Younger than I am.
Bantam Lyons’s yellow blacknailed fingers unrolled the baton. Wants a
wash too. Take off the rough dirt. Good morning, have you used Pears’
soap? Dandruff on his shoulders. Scalp wants oiling.
—I want to see about that French horse that’s running today, Bantam
Lyons said. Where the bugger is it?
He rustled the pleated pages, jerking his chin on his high collar.
Barber’s itch. Tight collar he’ll lose his hair. Better leave him the
paper and get shut of him.
—You can keep it, Mr Bloom said.
—Ascot. Gold cup. Wait, Bantam Lyons muttered. Half a mo. Maximum the
second.
—I was just going to throw it away, Mr Bloom said.
Bantam Lyons raised his eyes suddenly and leered weakly.
—What’s that? his sharp voice said.
—I say you can keep it, Mr Bloom answered. I was going to throw it away
that moment.
Bantam Lyons doubted an instant, leering: then thrust the outspread
sheets back on Mr Bloom’s arms.
—I’ll risk it, he said. Here, thanks.
He sped off towards Conway’s corner. God speed scut.
Mr Bloom folded the sheets again to a neat square and lodged the soap
in it, smiling. Silly lips of that chap. Betting. Regular hotbed of it
lately. Messenger boys stealing to put on sixpence. Raffle for large
tender turkey. Your Christmas dinner for threepence. Jack Fleming
embezzling to gamble then smuggled off to America. Keeps a hotel now.
They never come back. Fleshpots of Egypt.
He walked cheerfully towards the mosque of the baths. Remind you of a
mosque, redbaked bricks, the minarets. College sports today I see. He
eyed the horseshoe poster over the gate of college park: cyclist
doubled up like a cod in a pot. Damn bad ad. Now if they had made it
round like a wheel. Then the spokes: sports, sports, sports: and the
hub big: college. Something to catch the eye.
There’s Hornblower standing at the porter’s lodge. Keep him on hands:
might take a turn in there on the nod. How do you do, Mr Hornblower?
How do you do, sir?
Heavenly weather really. If life was always like that. Cricket weather.
Sit around under sunshades. Over after over. Out. They can’t play it
here. Duck for six wickets. Still Captain Culler broke a window in the
Kildare street club with a slog to square leg. Donnybrook fair more in
their line. And the skulls we were acracking when M’Carthy took the
floor. Heatwave. Won’t last. Always passing, the stream of life, which
in the stream of life we trace is dearer than them all.
Enjoy a bath now: clean trough of water, cool enamel, the gentle tepid
stream. This is my body.
He foresaw his pale body reclined in it at full, naked, in a womb of
warmth, oiled by scented melting soap, softly laved. He saw his trunk
and limbs riprippled over and sustained, buoyed lightly upward,
lemonyellow: his navel, bud of flesh: and saw the dark tangled curls of
his bush floating, floating hair of the stream around the limp father
of thousands, a languid floating flower.
[ 6 ]
Martin Cunningham, first, poked his silkhatted head into the creaking
carriage and, entering deftly, seated himself. Mr Power stepped in
after him, curving his height with care.
—Come on, Simon.
—After you, Mr Bloom said.
Mr Dedalus covered himself quickly and got in, saying:
—Yes, yes.
—Are we all here now? Martin Cunningham asked. Come along, Bloom.
Mr Bloom entered and sat in the vacant place. He pulled the door to
after him and slammed it twice till it shut tight. He passed an arm
through the armstrap and looked seriously from the open carriagewindow
at the lowered blinds of the avenue. One dragged aside: an old woman
peeping. Nose whiteflattened against the pane. Thanking her stars she
was passed over. Extraordinary the interest they take in a corpse. Glad
to see us go we give them such trouble coming. Job seems to suit them.
Huggermugger in corners. Slop about in slipperslappers for fear he’d
wake. Then getting it ready. Laying it out. Molly and Mrs Fleming
making the bed. Pull it more to your side. Our windingsheet. Never know
who will touch you dead. Wash and shampoo. I believe they clip the
nails and the hair. Keep a bit in an envelope. Grows all the same
after. Unclean job.
All waited. Nothing was said. Stowing in the wreaths probably. I am
sitting on something hard. Ah, that soap: in my hip pocket. Better
shift it out of that. Wait for an opportunity.
All waited. Then wheels were heard from in front, turning: then nearer:
then horses’ hoofs. A jolt. Their carriage began to move, creaking and
swaying. Other hoofs and creaking wheels started behind. The blinds of
the avenue passed and number nine with its craped knocker, door ajar.
At walking pace.
They waited still, their knees jogging, till they had turned and were
passing along the tramtracks. Tritonville road. Quicker. The wheels
rattled rolling over the cobbled causeway and the crazy glasses shook
rattling in the doorframes.
—What way is he taking us? Mr Power asked through both windows.
—Irishtown, Martin Cunningham said. Ringsend. Brunswick street.
Mr Dedalus nodded, looking out.
—That’s a fine old custom, he said. I am glad to see it has not died
out.
All watched awhile through their windows caps and hats lifted by
passers. Respect. The carriage swerved from the tramtrack to the
smoother road past Watery lane. Mr Bloom at gaze saw a lithe young man,
clad in mourning, a wide hat.
—There’s a friend of yours gone by, Dedalus, he said.
—Who is that?
—Your son and heir.
—Where is he? Mr Dedalus said, stretching over across.
The carriage, passing the open drains and mounds of rippedup roadway
before the tenement houses, lurched round the corner and, swerving back
to the tramtrack, rolled on noisily with chattering wheels. Mr Dedalus
fell back, saying:
—Was that Mulligan cad with him? His _fidus Achates_!
—No, Mr Bloom said. He was alone.
—Down with his aunt Sally, I suppose, Mr Dedalus said, the Goulding
faction, the drunken little costdrawer and Crissie, papa’s little lump
of dung, the wise child that knows her own father.
Mr Bloom smiled joylessly on Ringsend road. Wallace Bros: the
bottleworks: Dodder bridge.
Richie Goulding and the legal bag. Goulding, Collis and Ward he calls
the firm. His jokes are getting a bit damp. Great card he was. Waltzing
in Stamer street with Ignatius Gallaher on a Sunday morning, the
landlady’s two hats pinned on his head. Out on the rampage all night.
Beginning to tell on him now: that backache of his, I fear. Wife
ironing his back. Thinks he’ll cure it with pills. All breadcrumbs they
are. About six hundred per cent profit.
—He’s in with a lowdown crowd, Mr Dedalus snarled. That Mulligan is a
contaminated bloody doubledyed ruffian by all accounts. His name stinks
all over Dublin. But with the help of God and His blessed mother I’ll
make it my business to write a letter one of those days to his mother
or his aunt or whatever she is that will open her eye as wide as a
gate. I’ll tickle his catastrophe, believe you me.
He cried above the clatter of the wheels:
—I won’t have her bastard of a nephew ruin my son. A counterjumper’s
son. Selling tapes in my cousin, Peter Paul M’Swiney’s. Not likely.
He ceased. Mr Bloom glanced from his angry moustache to Mr Power’s mild
face and Martin Cunningham’s eyes and beard, gravely shaking. Noisy
selfwilled man. Full of his son. He is right. Something to hand on. If
little Rudy had lived. See him grow up. Hear his voice in the house.
Walking beside Molly in an Eton suit. My son. Me in his eyes. Strange
feeling it would be. From me. Just a chance. Must have been that
morning in Raymond terrace she was at the window watching the two dogs
at it by the wall of the cease to do evil. And the sergeant grinning
up. She had that cream gown on with the rip she never stitched. Give us
a touch, Poldy. God, I’m dying for it. How life begins.
Got big then. Had to refuse the Greystones concert. My son inside her.
I could have helped him on in life. I could. Make him independent.
Learn German too.
—Are we late? Mr Power asked.
—Ten minutes, Martin Cunningham said, looking at his watch.
Molly. Milly. Same thing watered down. Her tomboy oaths. O jumping
Jupiter! Ye gods and little fishes! Still, she’s a dear girl. Soon be a
woman. Mullingar. Dearest Papli. Young student. Yes, yes: a woman too.
Life, life.
The carriage heeled over and back, their four trunks swaying.
—Corny might have given us a more commodious yoke, Mr Power said.
—He might, Mr Dedalus said, if he hadn’t that squint troubling him. Do
you follow me?
He closed his left eye. Martin Cunningham began to brush away
crustcrumbs from under his thighs.
—What is this, he said, in the name of God? Crumbs?
—Someone seems to have been making a picnic party here lately, Mr Power
said.
All raised their thighs and eyed with disfavour the mildewed buttonless
leather of the seats. Mr Dedalus, twisting his nose, frowned downward
and said:
—Unless I’m greatly mistaken. What do you think, Martin?
—It struck me too, Martin Cunningham said.
Mr Bloom set his thigh down. Glad I took that bath. Feel my feet quite
clean. But I wish Mrs Fleming had darned these socks better.
Mr Dedalus sighed resignedly.
—After all, he said, it’s the most natural thing in the world.
—Did Tom Kernan turn up? Martin Cunningham asked, twirling the peak of
his beard gently.
—Yes, Mr Bloom answered. He’s behind with Ned Lambert and Hynes.
—And Corny Kelleher himself? Mr Power asked.
—At the cemetery, Martin Cunningham said.
—I met M’Coy this morning, Mr Bloom said. He said he’d try to come.
The carriage halted short.
—What’s wrong?
—We’re stopped.
—Where are we?
Mr Bloom put his head out of the window.
—The grand canal, he said.
Gasworks. Whooping cough they say it cures. Good job Milly never got
it. Poor children! Doubles them up black and blue in convulsions. Shame
really. Got off lightly with illnesses compared. Only measles. Flaxseed
tea. Scarlatina, influenza epidemics. Canvassing for death. Don’t miss
this chance. Dogs’ home over there. Poor old Athos! Be good to Athos,
Leopold, is my last wish. Thy will be done. We obey them in the grave.
A dying scrawl. He took it to heart, pined away. Quiet brute. Old men’s
dogs usually are.
A raindrop spat on his hat. He drew back and saw an instant of shower
spray dots over the grey flags. Apart. Curious. Like through a
colander. I thought it would. My boots were creaking I remember now.
—The weather is changing, he said quietly.
—A pity it did not keep up fine, Martin Cunningham said.
—Wanted for the country, Mr Power said. There’s the sun again coming
out.
Mr Dedalus, peering through his glasses towards the veiled sun, hurled
a mute curse at the sky.
—It’s as uncertain as a child’s bottom, he said.
—We’re off again.
The carriage turned again its stiff wheels and their trunks swayed
gently. Martin Cunningham twirled more quickly the peak of his beard.
—Tom Kernan was immense last night, he said. And Paddy Leonard taking
him off to his face.
—O, draw him out, Martin, Mr Power said eagerly. Wait till you hear
him, Simon, on Ben Dollard’s singing of _The Croppy Boy_.
—Immense, Martin Cunningham said pompously. _His singing of that simple
ballad, Martin, is the most trenchant rendering I ever heard in the
whole course of my experience._
—Trenchant, Mr Power said laughing. He’s dead nuts on that. And the
retrospective arrangement.
—Did you read Dan Dawson’s speech? Martin Cunningham asked.
—I did not then, Mr Dedalus said. Where is it?
—In the paper this morning.
Mr Bloom took the paper from his inside pocket. That book I must change
for her.
—No, no, Mr Dedalus said quickly. Later on please.
Mr Bloom’s glance travelled down the edge of the paper, scanning the
deaths: Callan, Coleman, Dignam, Fawcett, Lowry, Naumann, Peake, what
Peake is that? is it the chap was in Crosbie and Alleyne’s? no, Sexton,
Urbright. Inked characters fast fading on the frayed breaking paper.
Thanks to the Little Flower. Sadly missed. To the inexpressible grief
of his. Aged 88 after a long and tedious illness. Month’s mind:
Quinlan. On whose soul Sweet Jesus have mercy.
     It is now a month since dear Henry fled
     To his home up above in the sky
     While his family weeps and mourns his loss
     Hoping some day to meet him on high.
I tore up the envelope? Yes. Where did I put her letter after I read it
in the bath? He patted his waistcoatpocket. There all right. Dear Henry
fled. Before my patience are exhausted.
National school. Meade’s yard. The hazard. Only two there now. Nodding.
Full as a tick. Too much bone in their skulls. The other trotting round
with a fare. An hour ago I was passing there. The jarvies raised their
hats.
A pointsman’s back straightened itself upright suddenly against a
tramway standard by Mr Bloom’s window. Couldn’t they invent something
automatic so that the wheel itself much handier? Well but that fellow
would lose his job then? Well but then another fellow would get a job
making the new invention?
Antient concert rooms. Nothing on there. A man in a buff suit with a
crape armlet. Not much grief there. Quarter mourning. People in law
perhaps.
They went past the bleak pulpit of saint Mark’s, under the railway
bridge, past the Queen’s theatre: in silence. Hoardings: Eugene
Stratton, Mrs Bandmann Palmer. Could I go to see _Leah_ tonight, I
wonder. I said I. Or the _Lily of Killarney_? Elster Grimes Opera
Company. Big powerful change. Wet bright bills for next week. _Fun on
the Bristol_. Martin Cunningham could work a pass for the Gaiety. Have
to stand a drink or two. As broad as it’s long.
He’s coming in the afternoon. Her songs.
Plasto’s. Sir Philip Crampton’s memorial fountain bust. Who was he?
—How do you do? Martin Cunningham said, raising his palm to his brow in
salute.
—He doesn’t see us, Mr Power said. Yes, he does. How do you do?
—Who? Mr Dedalus asked.
—Blazes Boylan, Mr Power said. There he is airing his quiff.
Just that moment I was thinking.
Mr Dedalus bent across to salute. From the door of the Red Bank the
white disc of a straw hat flashed reply: spruce figure: passed.
Mr Bloom reviewed the nails of his left hand, then those of his right
hand. The nails, yes. Is there anything more in him that they she sees?
Fascination. Worst man in Dublin. That keeps him alive. They sometimes
feel what a person is. Instinct. But a type like that. My nails. I am
just looking at them: well pared. And after: thinking alone. Body
getting a bit softy. I would notice that: from remembering. What causes
that? I suppose the skin can’t contract quickly enough when the flesh
falls off. But the shape is there. The shape is there still. Shoulders.
Hips. Plump. Night of the dance dressing. Shift stuck between the
cheeks behind.
He clasped his hands between his knees and, satisfied, sent his vacant
glance over their faces.
Mr Power asked:
—How is the concert tour getting on, Bloom?
—O, very well, Mr Bloom said. I hear great accounts of it. It’s a good
idea, you see...
—Are you going yourself?
—Well no, Mr Bloom said. In point of fact I have to go down to the
county Clare on some private business. You see the idea is to tour the
chief towns. What you lose on one you can make up on the other.
—Quite so, Martin Cunningham said. Mary Anderson is up there now.
Have you good artists?
—Louis Werner is touring her, Mr Bloom said. O yes, we’ll have all
topnobbers. J. C. Doyle and John MacCormack I hope and. The best, in
fact.
—And _Madame_, Mr Power said smiling. Last but not least.
Mr Bloom unclasped his hands in a gesture of soft politeness and
clasped them. Smith O’Brien. Someone has laid a bunch of flowers there.
Woman. Must be his deathday. For many happy returns. The carriage
wheeling by Farrell’s statue united noiselessly their unresisting
knees.
Oot: a dullgarbed old man from the curbstone tendered his wares, his
mouth opening: oot.
—Four bootlaces for a penny.
Wonder why he was struck off the rolls. Had his office in Hume street.
Same house as Molly’s namesake, Tweedy, crown solicitor for Waterford.
Has that silk hat ever since. Relics of old decency. Mourning too.
Terrible comedown, poor wretch! Kicked about like snuff at a wake.
O’Callaghan on his last legs.
And _Madame_. Twenty past eleven. Up. Mrs Fleming is in to clean. Doing
her hair, humming: _voglio e non vorrei_. No: _vorrei e non_. Looking
at the tips of her hairs to see if they are split. _Mi trema un poco
il_. Beautiful on that _tre_ her voice is: weeping tone. A thrush. A
throstle. There is a word throstle that expresses that.
His eyes passed lightly over Mr Power’s goodlooking face. Greyish over
the ears. _Madame_: smiling. I smiled back. A smile goes a long way.
Only politeness perhaps. Nice fellow. Who knows is that true about the
woman he keeps? Not pleasant for the wife. Yet they say, who was it
told me, there is no carnal. You would imagine that would get played
out pretty quick. Yes, it was Crofton met him one evening bringing her
a pound of rumpsteak. What is this she was? Barmaid in Jury’s. Or the
Moira, was it?
They passed under the hugecloaked Liberator’s form.
Martin Cunningham nudged Mr Power.
—Of the tribe of Reuben, he said.
A tall blackbearded figure, bent on a stick, stumping round the corner
of Elvery’s Elephant house, showed them a curved hand open on his
spine.
—In all his pristine beauty, Mr Power said.
Mr Dedalus looked after the stumping figure and said mildly:
—The devil break the hasp of your back!
Mr Power, collapsing in laughter, shaded his face from the window as
the carriage passed Gray’s statue.
—We have all been there, Martin Cunningham said broadly.
His eyes met Mr Bloom’s eyes. He caressed his beard, adding:
—Well, nearly all of us.
Mr Bloom began to speak with sudden eagerness to his companions’ faces.
—That’s an awfully good one that’s going the rounds about Reuben J and
the son.
—About the boatman? Mr Power asked.
—Yes. Isn’t it awfully good?
—What is that? Mr Dedalus asked. I didn’t hear it.
—There was a girl in the case, Mr Bloom began, and he determined to
send him to the Isle of Man out of harm’s way but when they were
both.....
—What? Mr Dedalus asked. That confirmed bloody hobbledehoy is it?
—Yes, Mr Bloom said. They were both on the way to the boat and he tried
to drown.....
—Drown Barabbas! Mr Dedalus cried. I wish to Christ he did!
Mr Power sent a long laugh down his shaded nostrils.
—No, Mr Bloom said, the son himself.....
Martin Cunningham thwarted his speech rudely:
—Reuben J and the son were piking it down the quay next the river on
their way to the Isle of Man boat and the young chiseller suddenly got
loose and over the wall with him into the Liffey.
—For God’s sake! Mr Dedalus exclaimed in fright. Is he dead?
—Dead! Martin Cunningham cried. Not he! A boatman got a pole and fished
him out by the slack of the breeches and he was landed up to the father
on the quay more dead than alive. Half the town was there.
—Yes, Mr Bloom said. But the funny part is.....
—And Reuben J, Martin Cunningham said, gave the boatman a florin for
saving his son’s life.
A stifled sigh came from under Mr Power’s hand.
—O, he did, Martin Cunningham affirmed. Like a hero. A silver florin.
—Isn’t it awfully good? Mr Bloom said eagerly.
—One and eightpence too much, Mr Dedalus said drily.
Mr Power’s choked laugh burst quietly in the carriage.
Nelson’s pillar.
—Eight plums a penny! Eight for a penny!
—We had better look a little serious, Martin Cunningham said.
Mr Dedalus sighed.
—Ah then indeed, he said, poor little Paddy wouldn’t grudge us a laugh.
Many a good one he told himself.
—The Lord forgive me! Mr Power said, wiping his wet eyes with his
fingers. Poor Paddy! I little thought a week ago when I saw him last
and he was in his usual health that I’d be driving after him like this.
He’s gone from us.
—As decent a little man as ever wore a hat, Mr Dedalus said. He went
very suddenly.
—Breakdown, Martin Cunningham said. Heart.
He tapped his chest sadly.
Blazing face: redhot. Too much John Barleycorn. Cure for a red nose.
Drink like the devil till it turns adelite. A lot of money he spent
colouring it.
Mr Power gazed at the passing houses with rueful apprehension.
—He had a sudden death, poor fellow, he said.
—The best death, Mr Bloom said.
Their wide open eyes looked at him.
—No suffering, he said. A moment and all is over. Like dying in sleep.
No-one spoke.
Dead side of the street this. Dull business by day, land agents,
temperance hotel, Falconer’s railway guide, civil service college,
Gill’s, catholic club, the industrious blind. Why? Some reason. Sun or
wind. At night too. Chummies and slaveys. Under the patronage of the
late Father Mathew. Foundation stone for Parnell. Breakdown. Heart.
White horses with white frontlet plumes came round the Rotunda corner,
galloping. A tiny coffin flashed by. In a hurry to bury. A mourning
coach. Unmarried. Black for the married. Piebald for bachelors. Dun for
a nun.
—Sad, Martin Cunningham said. A child.
A dwarf’s face, mauve and wrinkled like little Rudy’s was. Dwarf’s
body, weak as putty, in a whitelined deal box. Burial friendly society
pays. Penny a week for a sod of turf. Our. Little. Beggar. Baby. Meant
nothing. Mistake of nature. If it’s healthy it’s from the mother. If
not from the man. Better luck next time.
—Poor little thing, Mr Dedalus said. It’s well out of it.
The carriage climbed more slowly the hill of Rutland square. Rattle his
bones. Over the stones. Only a pauper. Nobody owns.
—In the midst of life, Martin Cunningham said.
—But the worst of all, Mr Power said, is the man who takes his own
life.
Martin Cunningham drew out his watch briskly, coughed and put it back.
—The greatest disgrace to have in the family, Mr Power added.
—Temporary insanity, of course, Martin Cunningham said decisively. We
must take a charitable view of it.
—They say a man who does it is a coward, Mr Dedalus said.
—It is not for us to judge, Martin Cunningham said.
Mr Bloom, about to speak, closed his lips again. Martin Cunningham’s
large eyes. Looking away now. Sympathetic human man he is. Intelligent.
Like Shakespeare’s face. Always a good word to say. They have no mercy
on that here or infanticide. Refuse christian burial. They used to
drive a stake of wood through his heart in the grave. As if it wasn’t
broken already. Yet sometimes they repent too late. Found in the
riverbed clutching rushes. He looked at me. And that awful drunkard of
a wife of his. Setting up house for her time after time and then
pawning the furniture on him every Saturday almost. Leading him the
life of the damned. Wear the heart out of a stone, that. Monday
morning. Start afresh. Shoulder to the wheel. Lord, she must have
looked a sight that night Dedalus told me he was in there. Drunk about
the place and capering with Martin’s umbrella.
     And they call me the jewel of Asia,
     Of Asia,
     The geisha.
He looked away from me. He knows. Rattle his bones.
That afternoon of the inquest. The redlabelled bottle on the table. The
room in the hotel with hunting pictures. Stuffy it was. Sunlight
through the slats of the Venetian blind. The coroner’s sunlit ears, big
and hairy. Boots giving evidence. Thought he was asleep first. Then saw
like yellow streaks on his face. Had slipped down to the foot of the
bed. Verdict: overdose. Death by misadventure. The letter. For my son
Leopold.
No more pain. Wake no more. Nobody owns.
The carriage rattled swiftly along Blessington street. Over the stones.
—We are going the pace, I think, Martin Cunningham said.
—God grant he doesn’t upset us on the road, Mr Power said.
—I hope not, Martin Cunningham said. That will be a great race tomorrow
in Germany. The Gordon Bennett.
—Yes, by Jove, Mr Dedalus said. That will be worth seeing, faith.
As they turned into Berkeley street a streetorgan near the Basin sent
over and after them a rollicking rattling song of the halls. Has
anybody here seen Kelly? Kay ee double ell wy. Dead March from _Saul._
He’s as bad as old Antonio. He left me on my ownio. Pirouette! The
_Mater Misericordiae_. Eccles street. My house down there. Big place.
Ward for incurables there. Very encouraging. Our Lady’s Hospice for the
dying. Deadhouse handy underneath. Where old Mrs Riordan died. They
look terrible the women. Her feeding cup and rubbing her mouth with the
spoon. Then the screen round her bed for her to die. Nice young student
that was dressed that bite the bee gave me. He’s gone over to the
lying-in hospital they told me. From one extreme to the other.
The carriage galloped round a corner: stopped.
—What’s wrong now?
A divided drove of branded cattle passed the windows, lowing, slouching
by on padded hoofs, whisking their tails slowly on their clotted bony
croups. Outside them and through them ran raddled sheep bleating their
fear.
—Emigrants, Mr Power said.
—Huuuh! the drover’s voice cried, his switch sounding on their flanks.
Huuuh! out of that!
Thursday, of course. Tomorrow is killing day. Springers. Cuffe sold
them about twentyseven quid each. For Liverpool probably. Roastbeef for
old England. They buy up all the juicy ones. And then the fifth quarter
lost: all that raw stuff, hide, hair, horns. Comes to a big thing in a
year. Dead meat trade. Byproducts of the slaughterhouses for tanneries,
soap, margarine. Wonder if that dodge works now getting dicky meat off
the train at Clonsilla.
The carriage moved on through the drove.
—I can’t make out why the corporation doesn’t run a tramline from the
parkgate to the quays, Mr Bloom said. All those animals could be taken
in trucks down to the boats.
—Instead of blocking up the thoroughfare, Martin Cunningham said. Quite
right. They ought to.
—Yes, Mr Bloom said, and another thing I often thought, is to have
municipal funeral trams like they have in Milan, you know. Run the line
out to the cemetery gates and have special trams, hearse and carriage
and all. Don’t you see what I mean?
—O, that be damned for a story, Mr Dedalus said. Pullman car and saloon
diningroom.
—A poor lookout for Corny, Mr Power added.
—Why? Mr Bloom asked, turning to Mr Dedalus. Wouldn’t it be more decent
than galloping two abreast?
—Well, there’s something in that, Mr Dedalus granted.
—And, Martin Cunningham said, we wouldn’t have scenes like that when
the hearse capsized round Dunphy’s and upset the coffin on to the road.
—That was terrible, Mr Power’s shocked face said, and the corpse fell
about the road. Terrible!
—First round Dunphy’s, Mr Dedalus said, nodding. Gordon Bennett cup.
—Praises be to God! Martin Cunningham said piously.
Bom! Upset. A coffin bumped out on to the road. Burst open. Paddy
Dignam shot out and rolling over stiff in the dust in a brown habit too
large for him. Red face: grey now. Mouth fallen open. Asking what’s up
now. Quite right to close it. Looks horrid open. Then the insides
decompose quickly. Much better to close up all the orifices. Yes, also.
With wax. The sphincter loose. Seal up all.
—Dunphy’s, Mr Power announced as the carriage turned right.
Dunphy’s corner. Mourning coaches drawn up, drowning their grief. A
pause by the wayside. Tiptop position for a pub. Expect we’ll pull up
here on the way back to drink his health. Pass round the consolation.
Elixir of life.
But suppose now it did happen. Would he bleed if a nail say cut him in
the knocking about? He would and he wouldn’t, I suppose. Depends on
where. The circulation stops. Still some might ooze out of an artery.
It would be better to bury them in red: a dark red.
In silence they drove along Phibsborough road. An empty hearse trotted
by, coming from the cemetery: looks relieved.
Crossguns bridge: the royal canal.
Water rushed roaring through the sluices. A man stood on his dropping
barge, between clamps of turf. On the towpath by the lock a
slacktethered horse. Aboard of the _Bugabu._
Their eyes watched him. On the slow weedy waterway he had floated on
his raft coastward over Ireland drawn by a haulage rope past beds of
reeds, over slime, mudchoked bottles, carrion dogs. Athlone, Mullingar,
Moyvalley, I could make a walking tour to see Milly by the canal. Or
cycle down. Hire some old crock, safety. Wren had one the other day at
the auction but a lady’s. Developing waterways. James M’Cann’s hobby to
row me o’er the ferry. Cheaper transit. By easy stages. Houseboats.
Camping out. Also hearses. To heaven by water. Perhaps I will without
writing. Come as a surprise, Leixlip, Clonsilla. Dropping down lock by
lock to Dublin. With turf from the midland bogs. Salute. He lifted his
brown straw hat, saluting Paddy Dignam.
They drove on past Brian Boroimhe house. Near it now.
—I wonder how is our friend Fogarty getting on, Mr Power said.
—Better ask Tom Kernan, Mr Dedalus said.
—How is that? Martin Cunningham said. Left him weeping, I suppose?
—Though lost to sight, Mr Dedalus said, to memory dear.
The carriage steered left for Finglas road.
The stonecutter’s yard on the right. Last lap. Crowded on the spit of
land silent shapes appeared, white, sorrowful, holding out calm hands,
knelt in grief, pointing. Fragments of shapes, hewn. In white silence:
appealing. The best obtainable. Thos. H. Dennany, monumental builder
and sculptor.
Passed.
On the curbstone before Jimmy Geary, the sexton’s, an old tramp sat,
grumbling, emptying the dirt and stones out of his huge dustbrown
yawning boot. After life’s journey.
Gloomy gardens then went by: one by one: gloomy houses.
Mr Power pointed.
—That is where Childs was murdered, he said. The last house.
—So it is, Mr Dedalus said. A gruesome case. Seymour Bushe got him off.
Murdered his brother. Or so they said.
—The crown had no evidence, Mr Power said.
—Only circumstantial, Martin Cunningham added. That’s the maxim of the
law. Better for ninetynine guilty to escape than for one innocent
person to be wrongfully condemned.
They looked. Murderer’s ground. It passed darkly. Shuttered,
tenantless, unweeded garden. Whole place gone to hell. Wrongfully
condemned. Murder. The murderer’s image in the eye of the murdered.
They love reading about it. Man’s head found in a garden. Her clothing
consisted of. How she met her death. Recent outrage. The weapon used.
Murderer is still at large. Clues. A shoelace. The body to be exhumed.
Murder will out.
Cramped in this carriage. She mightn’t like me to come that way without
letting her know. Must be careful about women. Catch them once with
their pants down. Never forgive you after. Fifteen.
The high railings of Prospect rippled past their gaze. Dark poplars,
rare white forms. Forms more frequent, white shapes thronged amid the
trees, white forms and fragments streaming by mutely, sustaining vain
gestures on the air.
The felly harshed against the curbstone: stopped. Martin Cunningham put
out his arm and, wrenching back the handle, shoved the door open with
his knee. He stepped out. Mr Power and Mr Dedalus followed.
Change that soap now. Mr Bloom’s hand unbuttoned his hip pocket swiftly
and transferred the paperstuck soap to his inner handkerchief pocket.
He stepped out of the carriage, replacing the newspaper his other hand
still held.
Paltry funeral: coach and three carriages. It’s all the same.
Pallbearers, gold reins, requiem mass, firing a volley. Pomp of death.
Beyond the hind carriage a hawker stood by his barrow of cakes and
fruit. Simnel cakes those are, stuck together: cakes for the dead.
Dogbiscuits. Who ate them? Mourners coming out.
He followed his companions. Mr Kernan and Ned Lambert followed, Hynes
walking after them. Corny Kelleher stood by the opened hearse and took
out the two wreaths. He handed one to the boy.
Where is that child’s funeral disappeared to?
A team of horses passed from Finglas with toiling plodding tread,
dragging through the funereal silence a creaking waggon on which lay a
granite block. The waggoner marching at their head saluted.
Coffin now. Got here before us, dead as he is. Horse looking round at
it with his plume skeowways. Dull eye: collar tight on his neck,
pressing on a bloodvessel or something. Do they know what they cart out
here every day? Must be twenty or thirty funerals every day. Then Mount
Jerome for the protestants. Funerals all over the world everywhere
every minute. Shovelling them under by the cartload doublequick.
Thousands every hour. Too many in the world.
Mourners came out through the gates: woman and a girl. Leanjawed harpy,
hard woman at a bargain, her bonnet awry. Girl’s face stained with dirt
and tears, holding the woman’s arm, looking up at her for a sign to
cry. Fish’s face, bloodless and livid.
The mutes shouldered the coffin and bore it in through the gates. So
much dead weight. Felt heavier myself stepping out of that bath. First
the stiff: then the friends of the stiff. Corny Kelleher and the boy
followed with their wreaths. Who is that beside them? Ah, the
brother-in-law.
All walked after.
Martin Cunningham whispered:
—I was in mortal agony with you talking of suicide before Bloom.
—What? Mr Power whispered. How so?
—His father poisoned himself, Martin Cunningham whispered. Had the
Queen’s hotel in Ennis. You heard him say he was going to Clare.
Anniversary.
—O God! Mr Power whispered. First I heard of it. Poisoned himself?
He glanced behind him to where a face with dark thinking eyes followed
towards the cardinal’s mausoleum. Speaking.
—Was he insured? Mr Bloom asked.
—I believe so, Mr Kernan answered. But the policy was heavily
mortgaged. Martin is trying to get the youngster into Artane.
—How many children did he leave?
—Five. Ned Lambert says he’ll try to get one of the girls into Todd’s.
—A sad case, Mr Bloom said gently. Five young children.
—A great blow to the poor wife, Mr Kernan added.
—Indeed yes, Mr Bloom agreed.
Has the laugh at him now.
He looked down at the boots he had blacked and polished. She had
outlived him. Lost her husband. More dead for her than for me. One must
outlive the other. Wise men say. There are more women than men in the
world. Condole with her. Your terrible loss. I hope you’ll soon follow
him. For Hindu widows only. She would marry another. Him? No. Yet who
knows after. Widowhood not the thing since the old queen died. Drawn on
a guncarriage. Victoria and Albert. Frogmore memorial mourning. But in
the end she put a few violets in her bonnet. Vain in her heart of
hearts. All for a shadow. Consort not even a king. Her son was the
substance. Something new to hope for not like the past she wanted back,
waiting. It never comes. One must go first: alone, under the ground:
and lie no more in her warm bed.
—How are you, Simon? Ned Lambert said softly, clasping hands. Haven’t
seen you for a month of Sundays.
—Never better. How are all in Cork’s own town?
—I was down there for the Cork park races on Easter Monday, Ned Lambert
said. Same old six and eightpence. Stopped with Dick Tivy.
—And how is Dick, the solid man?
—Nothing between himself and heaven, Ned Lambert answered.
—By the holy Paul! Mr Dedalus said in subdued wonder. Dick Tivy bald?
—Martin is going to get up a whip for the youngsters, Ned Lambert said,
pointing ahead. A few bob a skull. Just to keep them going till the
insurance is cleared up.
—Yes, yes, Mr Dedalus said dubiously. Is that the eldest boy in front?
—Yes, Ned Lambert said, with the wife’s brother. John Henry Menton is
behind. He put down his name for a quid.
—I’ll engage he did, Mr Dedalus said. I often told poor Paddy he ought
to mind that job. John Henry is not the worst in the world.
—How did he lose it? Ned Lambert asked. Liquor, what?
—Many a good man’s fault, Mr Dedalus said with a sigh.
They halted about the door of the mortuary chapel. Mr Bloom stood
behind the boy with the wreath looking down at his sleekcombed hair and
at the slender furrowed neck inside his brandnew collar. Poor boy! Was
he there when the father? Both unconscious. Lighten up at the last
moment and recognise for the last time. All he might have done. I owe
three shillings to O’Grady. Would he understand? The mutes bore the
coffin into the chapel. Which end is his head?
After a moment he followed the others in, blinking in the screened
light. The coffin lay on its bier before the chancel, four tall yellow
candles at its corners. Always in front of us. Corny Kelleher, laying a
wreath at each fore corner, beckoned to the boy to kneel. The mourners
knelt here and there in prayingdesks. Mr Bloom stood behind near the
font and, when all had knelt, dropped carefully his unfolded newspaper
from his pocket and knelt his right knee upon it. He fitted his black
hat gently on his left knee and, holding its brim, bent over piously.
A server bearing a brass bucket with something in it came out through a
door. The whitesmocked priest came after him, tidying his stole with
one hand, balancing with the other a little book against his toad’s
belly. Who’ll read the book? I, said the rook.
They halted by the bier and the priest began to read out of his book
with a fluent croak.
Father Coffey. I knew his name was like a coffin. _Dominenamine._ Bully
about the muzzle he looks. Bosses the show. Muscular christian. Woe
betide anyone that looks crooked at him: priest. Thou art Peter. Burst
sideways like a sheep in clover Dedalus says he will. With a belly on
him like a poisoned pup. Most amusing expressions that man finds. Hhhn:
burst sideways.
_—Non intres in judicium cum servo tuo, Domine._
Makes them feel more important to be prayed over in Latin. Requiem
mass. Crape weepers. Blackedged notepaper. Your name on the altarlist.
Chilly place this. Want to feed well, sitting in there all the morning
in the gloom kicking his heels waiting for the next please. Eyes of a
toad too. What swells him up that way? Molly gets swelled after
cabbage. Air of the place maybe. Looks full up of bad gas. Must be an
infernal lot of bad gas round the place. Butchers, for instance: they
get like raw beefsteaks. Who was telling me? Mervyn Browne. Down in the
vaults of saint Werburgh’s lovely old organ hundred and fifty they have
to bore a hole in the coffins sometimes to let out the bad gas and burn
it. Out it rushes: blue. One whiff of that and you’re a goner.
My kneecap is hurting me. Ow. That’s better.
The priest took a stick with a knob at the end of it out of the boy’s
bucket and shook it over the coffin. Then he walked to the other end
and shook it again. Then he came back and put it back in the bucket. As
you were before you rested. It’s all written down: he has to do it.
_—Et ne nos inducas in tentationem._
The server piped the answers in the treble. I often thought it would be
better to have boy servants. Up to fifteen or so. After that, of course
...
Holy water that was, I expect. Shaking sleep out of it. He must be fed
up with that job, shaking that thing over all the corpses they trot up.
What harm if he could see what he was shaking it over. Every mortal day
a fresh batch: middleaged men, old women, children, women dead in
childbirth, men with beards, baldheaded businessmen, consumptive girls
with little sparrows’ breasts. All the year round he prayed the same
thing over them all and shook water on top of them: sleep. On Dignam
now.
_—In paradisum._
Said he was going to paradise or is in paradise. Says that over
everybody. Tiresome kind of a job. But he has to say something.
The priest closed his book and went off, followed by the server. Corny
Kelleher opened the sidedoors and the gravediggers came in, hoisted the
coffin again, carried it out and shoved it on their cart. Corny
Kelleher gave one wreath to the boy and one to the brother-in-law. All
followed them out of the sidedoors into the mild grey air. Mr Bloom
came last folding his paper again into his pocket. He gazed gravely at
the ground till the coffincart wheeled off to the left. The metal
wheels ground the gravel with a sharp grating cry and the pack of blunt
boots followed the trundled barrow along a lane of sepulchres.
The ree the ra the ree the ra the roo. Lord, I mustn’t lilt here.
—The O’Connell circle, Mr Dedalus said about him.
Mr Power’s soft eyes went up to the apex of the lofty cone.
—He’s at rest, he said, in the middle of his people, old Dan O’. But
his heart is buried in Rome. How many broken hearts are buried here,
Simon!
—Her grave is over there, Jack, Mr Dedalus said. I’ll soon be stretched
beside her. Let Him take me whenever He likes.
Breaking down, he began to weep to himself quietly, stumbling a little
in his walk. Mr Power took his arm.
—She’s better where she is, he said kindly.
—I suppose so, Mr Dedalus said with a weak gasp. I suppose she is in
heaven if there is a heaven.
Corny Kelleher stepped aside from his rank and allowed the mourners to
plod by.
—Sad occasions, Mr Kernan began politely.
Mr Bloom closed his eyes and sadly twice bowed his head.
—The others are putting on their hats, Mr Kernan said. I suppose we can
do so too. We are the last. This cemetery is a treacherous place.
They covered their heads.
—The reverend gentleman read the service too quickly, don’t you think?
Mr Kernan said with reproof.
Mr Bloom nodded gravely looking in the quick bloodshot eyes. Secret
eyes, secretsearching. Mason, I think: not sure. Beside him again. We
are the last. In the same boat. Hope he’ll say something else.
Mr Kernan added:
—The service of the Irish church used in Mount Jerome is simpler, more
impressive I must say.
Mr Bloom gave prudent assent. The language of course was another thing.
Mr Kernan said with solemnity:
—_I am the resurrection and the life_. That touches a man’s inmost
heart.
—It does, Mr Bloom said.
Your heart perhaps but what price the fellow in the six feet by two
with his toes to the daisies? No touching that. Seat of the affections.
Broken heart. A pump after all, pumping thousands of gallons of blood
every day. One fine day it gets bunged up: and there you are. Lots of
them lying around here: lungs, hearts, livers. Old rusty pumps: damn
the thing else. The resurrection and the life. Once you are dead you
are dead. That last day idea. Knocking them all up out of their graves.
Come forth, Lazarus! And he came fifth and lost the job. Get up! Last
day! Then every fellow mousing around for his liver and his lights and
the rest of his traps. Find damn all of himself that morning.
Pennyweight of powder in a skull. Twelve grammes one pennyweight. Troy
measure.
Corny Kelleher fell into step at their side.
—Everything went off A1, he said. What?
He looked on them from his drawling eye. Policeman’s shoulders. With
your tooraloom tooraloom.
—As it should be, Mr Kernan said.
—What? Eh? Corny Kelleher said.
Mr Kernan assured him.
—Who is that chap behind with Tom Kernan? John Henry Menton asked. I
know his face.
Ned Lambert glanced back.
—Bloom, he said, Madame Marion Tweedy that was, is, I mean, the
soprano. She’s his wife.
—O, to be sure, John Henry Menton said. I haven’t seen her for some
time. She was a finelooking woman. I danced with her, wait, fifteen
seventeen golden years ago, at Mat Dillon’s in Roundtown. And a good
armful she was.
He looked behind through the others.
—What is he? he asked. What does he do? Wasn’t he in the stationery
line? I fell foul of him one evening, I remember, at bowls.
Ned Lambert smiled.
—Yes, he was, he said, in Wisdom Hely’s. A traveller for blottingpaper.
—In God’s name, John Henry Menton said, what did she marry a coon like
that for? She had plenty of game in her then.
—Has still, Ned Lambert said. He does some canvassing for ads.
John Henry Menton’s large eyes stared ahead.
The barrow turned into a side lane. A portly man, ambushed among the
grasses, raised his hat in homage. The gravediggers touched their caps.
—John O’Connell, Mr Power said pleased. He never forgets a friend.
Mr O’Connell shook all their hands in silence. Mr Dedalus said:
—I am come to pay you another visit.
—My dear Simon, the caretaker answered in a low voice. I don’t want
your custom at all.
Saluting Ned Lambert and John Henry Menton he walked on at Martin
Cunningham’s side puzzling two long keys at his back.
—Did you hear that one, he asked them, about Mulcahy from the Coombe?
—I did not, Martin Cunningham said.
They bent their silk hats in concert and Hynes inclined his ear. The
caretaker hung his thumbs in the loops of his gold watchchain and spoke
in a discreet tone to their vacant smiles.
—They tell the story, he said, that two drunks came out here one foggy
evening to look for the grave of a friend of theirs. They asked for
Mulcahy from the Coombe and were told where he was buried. After
traipsing about in the fog they found the grave sure enough. One of the
drunks spelt out the name: Terence Mulcahy. The other drunk was
blinking up at a statue of Our Saviour the widow had got put up.
The caretaker blinked up at one of the sepulchres they passed. He
resumed:
—And, after blinking up at the sacred figure, _Not a bloody bit like
the man_, says he. _That’s not Mulcahy_, says he, _whoever done it_.
Rewarded by smiles he fell back and spoke with Corny Kelleher,
accepting the dockets given him, turning them over and scanning them as
he walked.
—That’s all done with a purpose, Martin Cunningham explained to Hynes.
—I know, Hynes said. I know that.
—To cheer a fellow up, Martin Cunningham said. It’s pure
goodheartedness: damn the thing else.
Mr Bloom admired the caretaker’s prosperous bulk. All want to be on
good terms with him. Decent fellow, John O’Connell, real good sort.
Keys: like Keyes’s ad: no fear of anyone getting out. No passout
checks. _Habeas corpus_. I must see about that ad after the funeral.
Did I write Ballsbridge on the envelope I took to cover when she
disturbed me writing to Martha? Hope it’s not chucked in the dead
letter office. Be the better of a shave. Grey sprouting beard. That’s
the first sign when the hairs come out grey. And temper getting cross.
Silver threads among the grey. Fancy being his wife. Wonder he had the
gumption to propose to any girl. Come out and live in the graveyard.
Dangle that before her. It might thrill her first. Courting death.
Shades of night hovering here with all the dead stretched about. The
shadows of the tombs when churchyards yawn and Daniel O’Connell must be
a descendant I suppose who is this used to say he was a queer breedy
man great catholic all the same like a big giant in the dark. Will o’
the wisp. Gas of graves. Want to keep her mind off it to conceive at
all. Women especially are so touchy. Tell her a ghost story in bed to
make her sleep. Have you ever seen a ghost? Well, I have. It was a
pitchdark night. The clock was on the stroke of twelve. Still they’d
kiss all right if properly keyed up. Whores in Turkish graveyards.
Learn anything if taken young. You might pick up a young widow here.
Men like that. Love among the tombstones. Romeo. Spice of pleasure. In
the midst of death we are in life. Both ends meet. Tantalising for the
poor dead. Smell of grilled beefsteaks to the starving. Gnawing their
vitals. Desire to grig people. Molly wanting to do it at the window.
Eight children he has anyway.
He has seen a fair share go under in his time, lying around him field
after field. Holy fields. More room if they buried them standing.
Sitting or kneeling you couldn’t. Standing? His head might come up some
day above ground in a landslip with his hand pointing. All honeycombed
the ground must be: oblong cells. And very neat he keeps it too: trim
grass and edgings. His garden Major Gamble calls Mount Jerome. Well, so
it is. Ought to be flowers of sleep. Chinese cemeteries with giant
poppies growing produce the best opium Mastiansky told me. The Botanic
Gardens are just over there. It’s the blood sinking in the earth gives
new life. Same idea those jews they said killed the christian boy.
Every man his price. Well preserved fat corpse, gentleman, epicure,
invaluable for fruit garden. A bargain. By carcass of William
Wilkinson, auditor and accountant, lately deceased, three pounds
thirteen and six. With thanks.
I daresay the soil would be quite fat with corpsemanure, bones, flesh,
nails. Charnelhouses. Dreadful. Turning green and pink decomposing. Rot
quick in damp earth. The lean old ones tougher. Then a kind of a
tallowy kind of a cheesy. Then begin to get black, black treacle oozing
out of them. Then dried up. Deathmoths. Of course the cells or whatever
they are go on living. Changing about. Live for ever practically.
Nothing to feed on feed on themselves.
But they must breed a devil of a lot of maggots. Soil must be simply
swirling with them. Your head it simply swurls. Those pretty little
seaside gurls. He looks cheerful enough over it. Gives him a sense of
power seeing all the others go under first. Wonder how he looks at
life. Cracking his jokes too: warms the cockles of his heart. The one
about the bulletin. Spurgeon went to heaven 4 a.m. this morning. 11
p.m. (closing time). Not arrived yet. Peter. The dead themselves the
men anyhow would like to hear an odd joke or the women to know what’s
in fashion. A juicy pear or ladies’ punch, hot, strong and sweet. Keep
out the damp. You must laugh sometimes so better do it that way.
Gravediggers in _Hamlet_. Shows the profound knowledge of the human
heart. Daren’t joke about the dead for two years at least. _De mortuis
nil nisi prius_. Go out of mourning first. Hard to imagine his funeral.
Seems a sort of a joke. Read your own obituary notice they say you live
longer. Gives you second wind. New lease of life.
—How many have you for tomorrow? the caretaker asked.
—Two, Corny Kelleher said. Half ten and eleven.
The caretaker put the papers in his pocket. The barrow had ceased to
trundle. The mourners split and moved to each side of the hole,
stepping with care round the graves. The gravediggers bore the coffin
and set its nose on the brink, looping the bands round it.
Burying him. We come to bury Cæsar. His ides of March or June. He
doesn’t know who is here nor care. Now who is that lankylooking galoot
over there in the macintosh? Now who is he I’d like to know? Now I’d
give a trifle to know who he is. Always someone turns up you never
dreamt of. A fellow could live on his lonesome all his life. Yes, he
could. Still he’d have to get someone to sod him after he died though
he could dig his own grave. We all do. Only man buries. No, ants too.
First thing strikes anybody. Bury the dead. Say Robinson Crusoe was
true to life. Well then Friday buried him. Every Friday buries a
Thursday if you come to look at it.
     O, poor Robinson Crusoe!
     How could you possibly do so?
Poor Dignam! His last lie on the earth in his box. When you think of
them all it does seem a waste of wood. All gnawed through. They could
invent a handsome bier with a kind of panel sliding, let it down that
way. Ay but they might object to be buried out of another fellow’s.
They’re so particular. Lay me in my native earth. Bit of clay from the
holy land. Only a mother and deadborn child ever buried in the one
coffin. I see what it means. I see. To protect him as long as possible
even in the earth. The Irishman’s house is his coffin. Embalming in
catacombs, mummies the same idea.
Mr Bloom stood far back, his hat in his hand, counting the bared heads.
Twelve. I’m thirteen. No. The chap in the macintosh is thirteen.
Death’s number. Where the deuce did he pop out of? He wasn’t in the
chapel, that I’ll swear. Silly superstition that about thirteen.
Nice soft tweed Ned Lambert has in that suit. Tinge of purple. I had
one like that when we lived in Lombard street west. Dressy fellow he
was once. Used to change three suits in the day. Must get that grey
suit of mine turned by Mesias. Hello. It’s dyed. His wife I forgot he’s
not married or his landlady ought to have picked out those threads for
him.
The coffin dived out of sight, eased down by the men straddled on the
gravetrestles. They struggled up and out: and all uncovered. Twenty.
Pause.
If we were all suddenly somebody else.
Far away a donkey brayed. Rain. No such ass. Never see a dead one, they
say. Shame of death. They hide. Also poor papa went away.
Gentle sweet air blew round the bared heads in a whisper. Whisper. The
boy by the gravehead held his wreath with both hands staring quietly in
the black open space. Mr Bloom moved behind the portly kindly
caretaker. Wellcut frockcoat. Weighing them up perhaps to see which
will go next. Well, it is a long rest. Feel no more. It’s the moment
you feel. Must be damned unpleasant. Can’t believe it at first. Mistake
must be: someone else. Try the house opposite. Wait, I wanted to. I
haven’t yet. Then darkened deathchamber. Light they want. Whispering
around you. Would you like to see a priest? Then rambling and
wandering. Delirium all you hid all your life. The death struggle. His
sleep is not natural. Press his lower eyelid. Watching is his nose
pointed is his jaw sinking are the soles of his feet yellow. Pull the
pillow away and finish it off on the floor since he’s doomed. Devil in
that picture of sinner’s death showing him a woman. Dying to embrace
her in his shirt. Last act of _Lucia. Shall I nevermore behold thee_?
Bam! He expires. Gone at last. People talk about you a bit: forget you.
Don’t forget to pray for him. Remember him in your prayers. Even
Parnell. Ivy day dying out. Then they follow: dropping into a hole, one
after the other.
We are praying now for the repose of his soul. Hoping you’re well and
not in hell. Nice change of air. Out of the fryingpan of life into the
fire of purgatory.
Does he ever think of the hole waiting for himself? They say you do
when you shiver in the sun. Someone walking over it. Callboy’s warning.
Near you. Mine over there towards Finglas, the plot I bought. Mamma,
poor mamma, and little Rudy.
The gravediggers took up their spades and flung heavy clods of clay in
on the coffin. Mr Bloom turned away his face. And if he was alive all
the time? Whew! By jingo, that would be awful! No, no: he is dead, of
course. Of course he is dead. Monday he died. They ought to have some
law to pierce the heart and make sure or an electric clock or a
telephone in the coffin and some kind of a canvas airhole. Flag of
distress. Three days. Rather long to keep them in summer. Just as well
to get shut of them as soon as you are sure there’s no.
The clay fell softer. Begin to be forgotten. Out of sight, out of mind.
The caretaker moved away a few paces and put on his hat. Had enough of
it. The mourners took heart of grace, one by one, covering themselves
without show. Mr Bloom put on his hat and saw the portly figure make
its way deftly through the maze of graves. Quietly, sure of his ground,
he traversed the dismal fields.
Hynes jotting down something in his notebook. Ah, the names. But he
knows them all. No: coming to me.
—I am just taking the names, Hynes said below his breath. What is your
christian name? I’m not sure.
—L, Mr Bloom said. Leopold. And you might put down M’Coy’s name too. He
asked me to.
—Charley, Hynes said writing. I know. He was on the _Freeman_ once.
So he was before he got the job in the morgue under Louis Byrne. Good
idea a postmortem for doctors. Find out what they imagine they know. He
died of a Tuesday. Got the run. Levanted with the cash of a few ads.
Charley, you’re my darling. That was why he asked me to. O well, does
no harm. I saw to that, M’Coy. Thanks, old chap: much obliged. Leave
him under an obligation: costs nothing.
—And tell us, Hynes said, do you know that fellow in the, fellow was
over there in the...
He looked around.
—Macintosh. Yes, I saw him, Mr Bloom said. Where is he now?
—M’Intosh, Hynes said scribbling. I don’t know who he is. Is that his
name?
He moved away, looking about him.
—No, Mr Bloom began, turning and stopping. I say, Hynes!
Didn’t hear. What? Where has he disappeared to? Not a sign. Well of all
the. Has anybody here seen? Kay ee double ell. Become invisible. Good
Lord, what became of him?
A seventh gravedigger came beside Mr Bloom to take up an idle spade.
—O, excuse me!
He stepped aside nimbly.
Clay, brown, damp, began to be seen in the hole. It rose. Nearly over.
A mound of damp clods rose more, rose, and the gravediggers rested
their spades. All uncovered again for a few instants. The boy propped
his wreath against a corner: the brother-in-law his on a lump. The
gravediggers put on their caps and carried their earthy spades towards
the barrow. Then knocked the blades lightly on the turf: clean. One
bent to pluck from the haft a long tuft of grass. One, leaving his
mates, walked slowly on with shouldered weapon, its blade blueglancing.
Silently at the gravehead another coiled the coffinband. His navelcord.
The brother-in-law, turning away, placed something in his free hand.
Thanks in silence. Sorry, sir: trouble. Headshake. I know that. For
yourselves just.
The mourners moved away slowly without aim, by devious paths, staying
at whiles to read a name on a tomb.
—Let us go round by the chief’s grave, Hynes said. We have time.
—Let us, Mr Power said.
They turned to the right, following their slow thoughts. With awe Mr
Power’s blank voice spoke:
—Some say he is not in that grave at all. That the coffin was filled
with stones. That one day he will come again.
Hynes shook his head.
—Parnell will never come again, he said. He’s there, all that was
mortal of him. Peace to his ashes.
Mr Bloom walked unheeded along his grove by saddened angels, crosses,
broken pillars, family vaults, stone hopes praying with upcast eyes,
old Ireland’s hearts and hands. More sensible to spend the money on
some charity for the living. Pray for the repose of the soul of. Does
anybody really? Plant him and have done with him. Like down a
coalshoot. Then lump them together to save time. All souls’ day.
Twentyseventh I’ll be at his grave. Ten shillings for the gardener. He
keeps it free of weeds. Old man himself. Bent down double with his
shears clipping. Near death’s door. Who passed away. Who departed this
life. As if they did it of their own accord. Got the shove, all of
them. Who kicked the bucket. More interesting if they told you what
they were. So and So, wheelwright. I travelled for cork lino. I paid
five shillings in the pound. Or a woman’s with her saucepan. I cooked
good Irish stew. Eulogy in a country churchyard it ought to be that
poem of whose is it Wordsworth or Thomas Campbell. Entered into rest
the protestants put it. Old Dr Murren’s. The great physician called him
home. Well it’s God’s acre for them. Nice country residence. Newly
plastered and painted. Ideal spot to have a quiet smoke and read the
_Church Times._ Marriage ads they never try to beautify. Rusty wreaths
hung on knobs, garlands of bronzefoil. Better value that for the money.
Still, the flowers are more poetical. The other gets rather tiresome,
never withering. Expresses nothing. Immortelles.
A bird sat tamely perched on a poplar branch. Like stuffed. Like the
wedding present alderman Hooper gave us. Hoo! Not a budge out of him.
Knows there are no catapults to let fly at him. Dead animal even
sadder. Silly-Milly burying the little dead bird in the kitchen
matchbox, a daisychain and bits of broken chainies on the grave.
The Sacred Heart that is: showing it. Heart on his sleeve. Ought to be
sideways and red it should be painted like a real heart. Ireland was
dedicated to it or whatever that. Seems anything but pleased. Why this
infliction? Would birds come then and peck like the boy with the basket
of fruit but he said no because they ought to have been afraid of the
boy. Apollo that was.
How many! All these here once walked round Dublin. Faithful departed.
As you are now so once were we.
Besides how could you remember everybody? Eyes, walk, voice. Well, the
voice, yes: gramophone. Have a gramophone in every grave or keep it in
the house. After dinner on a Sunday. Put on poor old greatgrandfather.
Kraahraark! Hellohellohello amawfullyglad kraark awfullygladaseeagain
hellohello amawf krpthsth. Remind you of the voice like the photograph
reminds you of the face. Otherwise you couldn’t remember the face after
fifteen years, say. For instance who? For instance some fellow that
died when I was in Wisdom Hely’s.
Rtststr! A rattle of pebbles. Wait. Stop!
He looked down intently into a stone crypt. Some animal. Wait. There he
goes.
An obese grey rat toddled along the side of the crypt, moving the
pebbles. An old stager: greatgrandfather: he knows the ropes. The grey
alive crushed itself in under the plinth, wriggled itself in under it.
Good hidingplace for treasure.
Who lives there? Are laid the remains of Robert Emery. Robert Emmet was
buried here by torchlight, wasn’t he? Making his rounds.
Tail gone now.
One of those chaps would make short work of a fellow. Pick the bones
clean no matter who it was. Ordinary meat for them. A corpse is meat
gone bad. Well and what’s cheese? Corpse of milk. I read in that
_Voyages in China_ that the Chinese say a white man smells like a
corpse. Cremation better. Priests dead against it. Devilling for the
other firm. Wholesale burners and Dutch oven dealers. Time of the
plague. Quicklime feverpits to eat them. Lethal chamber. Ashes to
ashes. Or bury at sea. Where is that Parsee tower of silence? Eaten by
birds. Earth, fire, water. Drowning they say is the pleasantest. See
your whole life in a flash. But being brought back to life no. Can’t
bury in the air however. Out of a flying machine. Wonder does the news
go about whenever a fresh one is let down. Underground communication.
We learned that from them. Wouldn’t be surprised. Regular square feed
for them. Flies come before he’s well dead. Got wind of Dignam. They
wouldn’t care about the smell of it. Saltwhite crumbling mush of
corpse: smell, taste like raw white turnips.
The gates glimmered in front: still open. Back to the world again.
Enough of this place. Brings you a bit nearer every time. Last time I
was here was Mrs Sinico’s funeral. Poor papa too. The love that kills.
And even scraping up the earth at night with a lantern like that case I
read of to get at fresh buried females or even putrefied with running
gravesores. Give you the creeps after a bit. I will appear to you after
death. You will see my ghost after death. My ghost will haunt you after
death. There is another world after death named hell. I do not like
that other world she wrote. No more do I. Plenty to see and hear and
feel yet. Feel live warm beings near you. Let them sleep in their
maggoty beds. They are not going to get me this innings. Warm beds:
warm fullblooded life.
Martin Cunningham emerged from a sidepath, talking gravely.
Solicitor, I think. I know his face. Menton, John Henry, solicitor,
commissioner for oaths and affidavits. Dignam used to be in his office.
Mat Dillon’s long ago. Jolly Mat. Convivial evenings. Cold fowl,
cigars, the Tantalus glasses. Heart of gold really. Yes, Menton. Got
his rag out that evening on the bowlinggreen because I sailed inside
him. Pure fluke of mine: the bias. Why he took such a rooted dislike to
me. Hate at first sight. Molly and Floey Dillon linked under the
lilactree, laughing. Fellow always like that, mortified if women are
by.
Got a dinge in the side of his hat. Carriage probably.
—Excuse me, sir, Mr Bloom said beside them.
They stopped.
—Your hat is a little crushed, Mr Bloom said pointing.
John Henry Menton stared at him for an instant without moving.
—There, Martin Cunningham helped, pointing also.
John Henry Menton took off his hat, bulged out the dinge and smoothed
the nap with care on his coatsleeve. He clapped the hat on his head
again.
—It’s all right now, Martin Cunningham said.
John Henry Menton jerked his head down in acknowledgment.
—Thank you, he said shortly.
They walked on towards the gates. Mr Bloom, chapfallen, drew behind a
few paces so as not to overhear. Martin laying down the law. Martin
could wind a sappyhead like that round his little finger, without his
seeing it.
Oyster eyes. Never mind. Be sorry after perhaps when it dawns on him.
Get the pull over him that way.
Thank you. How grand we are this morning!
[ 7 ]
IN THE HEART OF THE HIBERNIAN METROPOLIS
Before Nelson’s pillar trams slowed, shunted, changed trolley, started
for Blackrock, Kingstown and Dalkey, Clonskea, Rathgar and Terenure,
Palmerston Park and upper Rathmines, Sandymount Green, Rathmines,
Ringsend and Sandymount Tower, Harold’s Cross. The hoarse Dublin United
Tramway Company’s timekeeper bawled them off:
—Rathgar and Terenure!
—Come on, Sandymount Green!
Right and left parallel clanging ringing a doubledecker and a
singledeck moved from their railheads, swerved to the down line, glided
parallel.
—Start, Palmerston Park!
THE WEARER OF THE CROWN
Under the porch of the general post office shoeblacks called and
polished. Parked in North Prince’s street His Majesty’s vermilion
mailcars, bearing on their sides the royal initials, E. R., received
loudly flung sacks of letters, postcards, lettercards, parcels, insured
and paid, for local, provincial, British and overseas delivery.
GENTLEMEN OF THE PRESS
Grossbooted draymen rolled barrels dullthudding out of Prince’s stores
and bumped them up on the brewery float. On the brewery float bumped
dullthudding barrels rolled by grossbooted draymen out of Prince’s
stores.
—There it is, Red Murray said. Alexander Keyes.
—Just cut it out, will you? Mr Bloom said, and I’ll take it round to
the _Telegraph_ office.
The door of Ruttledge’s office creaked again. Davy Stephens, minute in
a large capecoat, a small felt hat crowning his ringlets, passed out
with a roll of papers under his cape, a king’s courier.
Red Murray’s long shears sliced out the advertisement from the
newspaper in four clean strokes. Scissors and paste.
—I’ll go through the printingworks, Mr Bloom said, taking the cut
square.
—Of course, if he wants a par, Red Murray said earnestly, a pen behind
his ear, we can do him one.
—Right, Mr Bloom said with a nod. I’ll rub that in.
We.
WILLIAM BRAYDEN, ESQUIRE, OF OAKLANDS, SANDYMOUNT
Red Murray touched Mr Bloom’s arm with the shears and whispered:
—Brayden.
Mr Bloom turned and saw the liveried porter raise his lettered cap as a
stately figure entered between the newsboards of the _Weekly Freeman
and National Press_ and the _Freeman’s Journal and National Press_.
Dullthudding Guinness’s barrels. It passed statelily up the staircase,
steered by an umbrella, a solemn beardframed face. The broadcloth back
ascended each step: back. All his brains are in the nape of his neck,
Simon Dedalus says. Welts of flesh behind on him. Fat folds of neck,
fat, neck, fat, neck.
—Don’t you think his face is like Our Saviour? Red Murray whispered.
The door of Ruttledge’s office whispered: ee: cree. They always build
one door opposite another for the wind to. Way in. Way out.
Our Saviour: beardframed oval face: talking in the dusk. Mary, Martha.
Steered by an umbrella sword to the footlights: Mario the tenor.
—Or like Mario, Mr Bloom said.
—Yes, Red Murray agreed. But Mario was said to be the picture of Our
Saviour.
Jesusmario with rougy cheeks, doublet and spindle legs. Hand on his
heart. In _Martha._
     Co-ome thou lost one,
     Co-ome thou dear one!
THE CROZIER AND THE PEN
—His grace phoned down twice this morning, Red Murray said gravely.
They watched the knees, legs, boots vanish. Neck.
A telegram boy stepped in nimbly, threw an envelope on the counter and
stepped off posthaste with a word:
_—Freeman!_
Mr Bloom said slowly:
—Well, he is one of our saviours also.
A meek smile accompanied him as he lifted the counterflap, as he passed
in through a sidedoor and along the warm dark stairs and passage, along
the now reverberating boards. But will he save the circulation?
Thumping. Thumping.
He pushed in the glass swingdoor and entered, stepping over strewn
packing paper. Through a lane of clanking drums he made his way towards
Nannetti’s reading closet.
WITH UNFEIGNED REGRET IT IS WE ANNOUNCE THE DISSOLUTION OF A MOST
RESPECTED DUBLIN BURGESS
Hynes here too: account of the funeral probably. Thumping. Thump. This
morning the remains of the late Mr Patrick Dignam. Machines. Smash a
man to atoms if they got him caught. Rule the world today. His
machineries are pegging away too. Like these, got out of hand:
fermenting. Working away, tearing away. And that old grey rat tearing
to get in.
HOW A GREAT DAILY ORGAN IS TURNED OUT
Mr Bloom halted behind the foreman’s spare body, admiring a glossy
crown.
Strange he never saw his real country. Ireland my country. Member for
College green. He boomed that workaday worker tack for all it was
worth. It’s the ads and side features sell a weekly, not the stale news
in the official gazette. Queen Anne is dead. Published by authority in
the year one thousand and. Demesne situate in the townland of
Rosenallis, barony of Tinnahinch. To all whom it may concern schedule
pursuant to statute showing return of number of mules and jennets
exported from Ballina. Nature notes. Cartoons. Phil Blake’s weekly Pat
and Bull story. Uncle Toby’s page for tiny tots. Country bumpkin’s
queries. Dear Mr Editor, what is a good cure for flatulence? I’d like
that part. Learn a lot teaching others. The personal note. M. A. P.
Mainly all pictures. Shapely bathers on golden strand. World’s biggest
balloon. Double marriage of sisters celebrated. Two bridegrooms
laughing heartily at each other. Cuprani too, printer. More Irish than
the Irish.
The machines clanked in threefour time. Thump, thump, thump. Now if he
got paralysed there and no-one knew how to stop them they’d clank on
and on the same, print it over and over and up and back. Monkeydoodle
the whole thing. Want a cool head.
—Well, get it into the evening edition, councillor, Hynes said.
Soon be calling him my lord mayor. Long John is backing him, they say.
The foreman, without answering, scribbled press on a corner of the
sheet and made a sign to a typesetter. He handed the sheet silently
over the dirty glass screen.
—Right: thanks, Hynes said moving off.
Mr Bloom stood in his way.
—If you want to draw the cashier is just going to lunch, he said,
pointing backward with his thumb.
—Did you? Hynes asked.
—Mm, Mr Bloom said. Look sharp and you’ll catch him.
—Thanks, old man, Hynes said. I’ll tap him too.
He hurried on eagerly towards the _Freeman’s Journal_.
Three bob I lent him in Meagher’s. Three weeks. Third hint.
WE SEE THE CANVASSER AT WORK
Mr Bloom laid his cutting on Mr Nannetti’s desk.
—Excuse me, councillor, he said. This ad, you see. Keyes, you remember?
Mr Nannetti considered the cutting awhile and nodded.
—He wants it in for July, Mr Bloom said.
The foreman moved his pencil towards it.
—But wait, Mr Bloom said. He wants it changed. Keyes, you see. He wants
two keys at the top.
Hell of a racket they make. He doesn’t hear it. Nannan. Iron nerves.
Maybe he understands what I.
The foreman turned round to hear patiently and, lifting an elbow, began
to scratch slowly in the armpit of his alpaca jacket.
—Like that, Mr Bloom said, crossing his forefingers at the top.
Let him take that in first.
Mr Bloom, glancing sideways up from the cross he had made, saw the
foreman’s sallow face, think he has a touch of jaundice, and beyond the
obedient reels feeding in huge webs of paper. Clank it. Clank it. Miles
of it unreeled. What becomes of it after? O, wrap up meat, parcels:
various uses, thousand and one things.
Slipping his words deftly into the pauses of the clanking he drew
swiftly on the scarred woodwork.
HOUSE OF KEY(E)S
—Like that, see. Two crossed keys here. A circle. Then here the name.
Alexander Keyes, tea, wine and spirit merchant. So on.
Better not teach him his own business.
—You know yourself, councillor, just what he wants. Then round the top
in leaded: the house of keys. You see? Do you think that’s a good idea?
The foreman moved his scratching hand to his lower ribs and scratched
there quietly.
—The idea, Mr Bloom said, is the house of keys. You know, councillor,
the Manx parliament. Innuendo of home rule. Tourists, you know, from
the isle of Man. Catches the eye, you see. Can you do that?
I could ask him perhaps about how to pronounce that _voglio._ But then
if he didn’t know only make it awkward for him. Better not.
—We can do that, the foreman said. Have you the design?
—I can get it, Mr Bloom said. It was in a Kilkenny paper. He has a
house there too. I’ll just run out and ask him. Well, you can do that
and just a little par calling attention. You know the usual. Highclass
licensed premises. Longfelt want. So on.
The foreman thought for an instant.
—We can do that, he said. Let him give us a three months’ renewal.
A typesetter brought him a limp galleypage. He began to check it
silently. Mr Bloom stood by, hearing the loud throbs of cranks,
watching the silent typesetters at their cases.
ORTHOGRAPHICAL
Want to be sure of his spelling. Proof fever. Martin Cunningham forgot
to give us his spellingbee conundrum this morning. It is amusing to
view the unpar one ar alleled embarra two ars is it? double ess ment of
a harassed pedlar while gauging au the symmetry with a y of a peeled
pear under a cemetery wall. Silly, isn’t it? Cemetery put in of course
on account of the symmetry.
I should have said when he clapped on his topper. Thank you. I ought to
have said something about an old hat or something. No. I could have
said. Looks as good as new now. See his phiz then.
Sllt. The nethermost deck of the first machine jogged forward its
flyboard with sllt the first batch of quirefolded papers. Sllt. Almost
human the way it sllt to call attention. Doing its level best to speak.
That door too sllt creaking, asking to be shut. Everything speaks in
its own way. Sllt.
NOTED CHURCHMAN AN OCCASIONAL CONTRIBUTOR
The foreman handed back the galleypage suddenly, saying:
—Wait. Where’s the archbishop’s letter? It’s to be repeated in the
_Telegraph._ Where’s what’s his name?
He looked about him round his loud unanswering machines.
—Monks, sir? a voice asked from the castingbox.
—Ay. Where’s Monks?
—Monks!
Mr Bloom took up his cutting. Time to get out.
—Then I’ll get the design, Mr Nannetti, he said, and you’ll give it a
good place I know.
—Monks!
—Yes, sir.
Three months’ renewal. Want to get some wind off my chest first. Try it
anyhow. Rub in August: good idea: horseshow month. Ballsbridge.
Tourists over for the show.
A DAYFATHER
He walked on through the caseroom passing an old man, bowed,
spectacled, aproned. Old Monks, the dayfather. Queer lot of stuff he
must have put through his hands in his time: obituary notices, pubs’
ads, speeches, divorce suits, found drowned. Nearing the end of his
tether now. Sober serious man with a bit in the savingsbank I’d say.
Wife a good cook and washer. Daughter working the machine in the
parlour. Plain Jane, no damn nonsense.
AND IT WAS THE FEAST OF THE PASSOVER
He stayed in his walk to watch a typesetter neatly distributing type.
Reads it backwards first. Quickly he does it. Must require some
practice that. mangiD kcirtaP. Poor papa with his hagadah book, reading
backwards with his finger to me. Pessach. Next year in Jerusalem. Dear,
O dear! All that long business about that brought us out of the land of
Egypt and into the house of bondage _alleluia. Shema Israel Adonai
Elohenu_. No, that’s the other. Then the twelve brothers, Jacob’s sons.
And then the lamb and the cat and the dog and the stick and the water
and the butcher. And then the angel of death kills the butcher and he
kills the ox and the dog kills the cat. Sounds a bit silly till you
come to look into it well. Justice it means but it’s everybody eating
everyone else. That’s what life is after all. How quickly he does that
job. Practice makes perfect. Seems to see with his fingers.
Mr Bloom passed on out of the clanking noises through the gallery on to
the landing. Now am I going to tram it out all the way and then catch
him out perhaps. Better phone him up first. Number? Yes. Same as
Citron’s house. Twentyeight. Twentyeight double four.
ONLY ONCE MORE THAT SOAP
He went down the house staircase. Who the deuce scrawled all over those
walls with matches? Looks as if they did it for a bet. Heavy greasy
smell there always is in those works. Lukewarm glue in Thom’s next door
when I was there.
He took out his handkerchief to dab his nose. Citronlemon? Ah, the soap
I put there. Lose it out of that pocket. Putting back his handkerchief
he took out the soap and stowed it away, buttoned, into the hip pocket
of his trousers.
What perfume does your wife use? I could go home still: tram: something
I forgot. Just to see: before: dressing. No. Here. No.
A sudden screech of laughter came from the _Evening Telegraph_ office.
Know who that is. What’s up? Pop in a minute to phone. Ned Lambert it
is.
He entered softly.
ERIN, GREEN GEM OF THE SILVER SEA
—The ghost walks, professor MacHugh murmured softly, biscuitfully to
the dusty windowpane.
Mr Dedalus, staring from the empty fireplace at Ned Lambert’s quizzing
face, asked of it sourly:
—Agonising Christ, wouldn’t it give you a heartburn on your arse?
Ned Lambert, seated on the table, read on:
—_Or again, note the meanderings of some purling rill as it babbles on
its way, tho’ quarrelling with the stony obstacles, to the tumbling
waters of Neptune’s blue domain, ’mid mossy banks, fanned by gentlest
zephyrs, played on by the glorious sunlight or ’neath the shadows cast
o’er its pensive bosom by the overarching leafage of the giants of the
forest_. What about that, Simon? he asked over the fringe of his
newspaper. How’s that for high?
—Changing his drink, Mr Dedalus said.
Ned Lambert, laughing, struck the newspaper on his knees, repeating:
—_The pensive bosom and the overarsing leafage_. O boys! O boys!
—And Xenophon looked upon Marathon, Mr Dedalus said, looking again on
the fireplace and to the window, and Marathon looked on the sea.
—That will do, professor MacHugh cried from the window. I don’t want to
hear any more of the stuff.
He ate off the crescent of water biscuit he had been nibbling and,
hungered, made ready to nibble the biscuit in his other hand.
High falutin stuff. Bladderbags. Ned Lambert is taking a day off I see.
Rather upsets a man’s day, a funeral does. He has influence they say.
Old Chatterton, the vicechancellor, is his granduncle or his
greatgranduncle. Close on ninety they say. Subleader for his death
written this long time perhaps. Living to spite them. Might go first
himself. Johnny, make room for your uncle. The right honourable Hedges
Eyre Chatterton. Daresay he writes him an odd shaky cheque or two on
gale days. Windfall when he kicks out. Alleluia.
—Just another spasm, Ned Lambert said.
—What is it? Mr Bloom asked.
—A recently discovered fragment of Cicero, professor MacHugh answered
with pomp of tone. _Our lovely land_.
SHORT BUT TO THE POINT
—Whose land? Mr Bloom said simply.
—Most pertinent question, the professor said between his chews. With an
accent on the whose.
—Dan Dawson’s land Mr Dedalus said.
—Is it his speech last night? Mr Bloom asked.
Ned Lambert nodded.
—But listen to this, he said.
The doorknob hit Mr Bloom in the small of the back as the door was
pushed in.
—Excuse me, J. J. O’Molloy said, entering.
Mr Bloom moved nimbly aside.
—I beg yours, he said.
—Good day, Jack.
—Come in. Come in.
—Good day.
—How are you, Dedalus?
—Well. And yourself?
J. J. O’Molloy shook his head.
SAD
Cleverest fellow at the junior bar he used to be. Decline, poor chap.
That hectic flush spells finis for a man. Touch and go with him. What’s
in the wind, I wonder. Money worry.
—_Or again if we but climb the serried mountain peaks._
—You’re looking extra.
—Is the editor to be seen? J. J. O’Molloy asked, looking towards the
inner door.
—Very much so, professor MacHugh said. To be seen and heard. He’s in
his sanctum with Lenehan.
J. J. O’Molloy strolled to the sloping desk and began to turn back the
pink pages of the file.
Practice dwindling. A mighthavebeen. Losing heart. Gambling. Debts of
honour. Reaping the whirlwind. Used to get good retainers from D. and
T. Fitzgerald. Their wigs to show the grey matter. Brains on their
sleeve like the statue in Glasnevin. Believe he does some literary work
for the _Express_ with Gabriel Conroy. Wellread fellow. Myles Crawford
began on the _Independent._ Funny the way those newspaper men veer
about when they get wind of a new opening. Weathercocks. Hot and cold
in the same breath. Wouldn’t know which to believe. One story good till
you hear the next. Go for one another baldheaded in the papers and then
all blows over. Hail fellow well met the next moment.
—Ah, listen to this for God’ sake, Ned Lambert pleaded. _Or again if we
but climb the serried mountain peaks..._
—Bombast! the professor broke in testily. Enough of the inflated
windbag!
—_Peaks_, Ned Lambert went on, _towering high on high, to bathe our
souls, as it were..._
—Bathe his lips, Mr Dedalus said. Blessed and eternal God! Yes? Is he
taking anything for it?
_—As ’twere, in the peerless panorama of Ireland’s portfolio,
unmatched, despite their wellpraised prototypes in other vaunted prize
regions, for very beauty, of bosky grove and undulating plain and
luscious pastureland of vernal green, steeped in the transcendent
translucent glow of our mild mysterious Irish twilight..._
HIS NATIVE DORIC
—The moon, professor MacHugh said. He forgot Hamlet.
_—That mantles the vista far and wide and wait till the glowing orb of
the moon shine forth to irradiate her silver effulgence..._
—O! Mr Dedalus cried, giving vent to a hopeless groan. Shite and
onions! That’ll do, Ned. Life is too short.
He took off his silk hat and, blowing out impatiently his bushy
moustache, welshcombed his hair with raking fingers.
Ned Lambert tossed the newspaper aside, chuckling with delight. An
instant after a hoarse bark of laughter burst over professor MacHugh’s
unshaven blackspectacled face.
—Doughy Daw! he cried.
WHAT WETHERUP SAID
All very fine to jeer at it now in cold print but it goes down like hot
cake that stuff. He was in the bakery line too, wasn’t he? Why they
call him Doughy Daw. Feathered his nest well anyhow. Daughter engaged
to that chap in the inland revenue office with the motor. Hooked that
nicely. Entertainments. Open house. Big blowout. Wetherup always said
that. Get a grip of them by the stomach.
The inner door was opened violently and a scarlet beaked face, crested
by a comb of feathery hair, thrust itself in. The bold blue eyes stared
about them and the harsh voice asked:
—What is it?
—And here comes the sham squire himself! professor MacHugh said
grandly.
—Getonouthat, you bloody old pedagogue! the editor said in recognition.
—Come, Ned, Mr Dedalus said, putting on his hat. I must get a drink
after that.
—Drink! the editor cried. No drinks served before mass.
—Quite right too, Mr Dedalus said, going out. Come on, Ned.
Ned Lambert sidled down from the table. The editor’s blue eyes roved
towards Mr Bloom’s face, shadowed by a smile.
—Will you join us, Myles? Ned Lambert asked.
MEMORABLE BATTLES RECALLED
—North Cork militia! the editor cried, striding to the mantelpiece. We
won every time! North Cork and Spanish officers!
—Where was that, Myles? Ned Lambert asked with a reflective glance at
his toecaps.
—In Ohio! the editor shouted.
—So it was, begad, Ned Lambert agreed.
Passing out he whispered to J. J. O’Molloy:
—Incipient jigs. Sad case.
—Ohio! the editor crowed in high treble from his uplifted scarlet face.
My Ohio!
—A perfect cretic! the professor said. Long, short and long.
O, HARP EOLIAN!
He took a reel of dental floss from his waistcoat pocket and, breaking
off a piece, twanged it smartly between two and two of his resonant
unwashed teeth.
—Bingbang, bangbang.
Mr Bloom, seeing the coast clear, made for the inner door.
—Just a moment, Mr Crawford, he said. I just want to phone about an ad.
He went in.
—What about that leader this evening? professor MacHugh asked, coming
to the editor and laying a firm hand on his shoulder.
—That’ll be all right, Myles Crawford said more calmly. Never you fret.
Hello, Jack. That’s all right.
—Good day, Myles, J. J. O’Molloy said, letting the pages he held slip
limply back on the file. Is that Canada swindle case on today?
The telephone whirred inside.
—Twentyeight... No, twenty... Double four... Yes.
SPOT THE WINNER
Lenehan came out of the inner office with _Sport_’s tissues.
—Who wants a dead cert for the Gold cup? he asked. Sceptre with O.
Madden up.
He tossed the tissues on to the table.
Screams of newsboys barefoot in the hall rushed near and the door was
flung open.
—Hush, Lenehan said. I hear feetstoops.
Professor MacHugh strode across the room and seized the cringing urchin
by the collar as the others scampered out of the hall and down the
steps. The tissues rustled up in the draught, floated softly in the air
blue scrawls and under the table came to earth.
—It wasn’t me, sir. It was the big fellow shoved me, sir.
—Throw him out and shut the door, the editor said. There’s a hurricane
blowing.
Lenehan began to paw the tissues up from the floor, grunting as he
stooped twice.
—Waiting for the racing special, sir, the newsboy said. It was Pat
Farrell shoved me, sir.
He pointed to two faces peering in round the doorframe.
—Him, sir.
—Out of this with you, professor MacHugh said gruffly.
He hustled the boy out and banged the door to.
J. J. O’Molloy turned the files crackingly over, murmuring, seeking:
—Continued on page six, column four.
—Yes, _Evening Telegraph_ here, Mr Bloom phoned from the inner office.
Is the boss...? Yes, _Telegraph_... To where? Aha! Which auction
rooms?... Aha! I see... Right. I’ll catch him.
A COLLISION ENSUES
The bell whirred again as he rang off. He came in quickly and bumped
against Lenehan who was struggling up with the second tissue.
—_Pardon, monsieur_, Lenehan said, clutching him for an instant and
making a grimace.
—My fault, Mr Bloom said, suffering his grip. Are you hurt? I’m in a
hurry.
—Knee, Lenehan said.
He made a comic face and whined, rubbing his knee:
—The accumulation of the _anno Domini_.
—Sorry, Mr Bloom said.
He went to the door and, holding it ajar, paused. J. J. O’Molloy
slapped the heavy pages over. The noise of two shrill voices, a
mouthorgan, echoed in the bare hallway from the newsboys squatted on
the doorsteps:
     We are the boys of Wexford
     Who fought with heart and hand.
EXIT BLOOM
—I’m just running round to Bachelor’s walk, Mr Bloom said, about this
ad of Keyes’s. Want to fix it up. They tell me he’s round there in
Dillon’s.
He looked indecisively for a moment at their faces. The editor who,
leaning against the mantelshelf, had propped his head on his hand,
suddenly stretched forth an arm amply.
—Begone! he said. The world is before you.
—Back in no time, Mr Bloom said, hurrying out.
J. J. O’Molloy took the tissues from Lenehan’s hand and read them,
blowing them apart gently, without comment.
—He’ll get that advertisement, the professor said, staring through his
blackrimmed spectacles over the crossblind. Look at the young scamps
after him.
—Show. Where? Lenehan cried, running to the window.
A STREET CORTÈGE
Both smiled over the crossblind at the file of capering newsboys in Mr
Bloom’s wake, the last zigzagging white on the breeze a mocking kite, a
tail of white bowknots.
—Look at the young guttersnipe behind him hue and cry, Lenehan said,
and you’ll kick. O, my rib risible! Taking off his flat spaugs and the
walk. Small nines. Steal upon larks.
He began to mazurka in swift caricature across the floor on sliding
feet past the fireplace to J. J. O’Molloy who placed the tissues in his
receiving hands.
—What’s that? Myles Crawford said with a start. Where are the other two
gone?
—Who? the professor said, turning. They’re gone round to the Oval for a
drink. Paddy Hooper is there with Jack Hall. Came over last night.
—Come on then, Myles Crawford said. Where’s my hat?
He walked jerkily into the office behind, parting the vent of his
jacket, jingling his keys in his back pocket. They jingled then in the
air and against the wood as he locked his desk drawer.
—He’s pretty well on, professor MacHugh said in a low voice.
—Seems to be, J. J. O’Molloy said, taking out a cigarettecase in
murmuring meditation, but it is not always as it seems. Who has the
most matches?
THE CALUMET OF PEACE
He offered a cigarette to the professor and took one himself. Lenehan
promptly struck a match for them and lit their cigarettes in turn. J.
J. O’Molloy opened his case again and offered it.
—_Thanky vous_, Lenehan said, helping himself.
The editor came from the inner office, a straw hat awry on his brow. He
declaimed in song, pointing sternly at professor MacHugh:
     ’Twas rank and fame that tempted thee,
     ’Twas empire charmed thy heart.
The professor grinned, locking his long lips.
—Eh? You bloody old Roman empire? Myles Crawford said.
He took a cigarette from the open case. Lenehan, lighting it for him
with quick grace, said:
—Silence for my brandnew riddle!
—_Imperium romanum_, J. J. O’Molloy said gently. It sounds nobler than
British or Brixton. The word reminds one somehow of fat in the fire.
Myles Crawford blew his first puff violently towards the ceiling.
—That’s it, he said. We are the fat. You and I are the fat in the fire.
We haven’t got the chance of a snowball in hell.
THE GRANDEUR THAT WAS ROME
—Wait a moment, professor MacHugh said, raising two quiet claws. We
mustn’t be led away by words, by sounds of words. We think of Rome,
imperial, imperious, imperative.
He extended elocutionary arms from frayed stained shirtcuffs, pausing:
—What was their civilisation? Vast, I allow: but vile. Cloacae: sewers.
The Jews in the wilderness and on the mountaintop said: _It is meet to
be here. Let us build an altar to Jehovah_. The Roman, like the
Englishman who follows in his footsteps, brought to every new shore on
which he set his foot (on our shore he never set it) only his cloacal
obsession. He gazed about him in his toga and he said: _It is meet to
be here. Let us construct a watercloset._
—Which they accordingly did do, Lenehan said. Our old ancient
ancestors, as we read in the first chapter of Guinness’s, were partial
to the running stream.
—They were nature’s gentlemen, J. J. O’Molloy murmured. But we have
also Roman law.
—And Pontius Pilate is its prophet, professor MacHugh responded.
—Do you know that story about chief baron Palles? J. J. O’Molloy asked.
It was at the royal university dinner. Everything was going swimmingly
...
—First my riddle, Lenehan said. Are you ready?
Mr O’Madden Burke, tall in copious grey of Donegal tweed, came in from
the hallway. Stephen Dedalus, behind him, uncovered as he entered.
—_Entrez, mes enfants!_ Lenehan cried.
—I escort a suppliant, Mr O’Madden Burke said melodiously. Youth led by
Experience visits Notoriety.
—How do you do? the editor said, holding out a hand. Come in. Your
governor is just gone.
???
Lenehan said to all:
—Silence! What opera resembles a railwayline? Reflect, ponder,
excogitate, reply.
Stephen handed over the typed sheets, pointing to the title and
signature.
—Who? the editor asked.
Bit torn off.
—Mr Garrett Deasy, Stephen said.
—That old pelters, the editor said. Who tore it? Was he short taken?
     On swift sail flaming
     From storm and south
     He comes, pale vampire,
     Mouth to my mouth.
—Good day, Stephen, the professor said, coming to peer over their
shoulders. Foot and mouth? Are you turned...?
Bullockbefriending bard.
SHINDY IN WELLKNOWN RESTAURANT
—Good day, sir, Stephen answered blushing. The letter is not mine. Mr
Garrett Deasy asked me to...
—O, I know him, Myles Crawford said, and I knew his wife too. The
bloodiest old tartar God ever made. By Jesus, she had the foot and
mouth disease and no mistake! The night she threw the soup in the
waiter’s face in the Star and Garter. Oho!
A woman brought sin into the world. For Helen, the runaway wife of
Menelaus, ten years the Greeks. O’Rourke, prince of Breffni.
—Is he a widower? Stephen asked.
—Ay, a grass one, Myles Crawford said, his eye running down the
typescript. Emperor’s horses. Habsburg. An Irishman saved his life on
the ramparts of Vienna. Don’t you forget! Maximilian Karl O’Donnell,
graf von Tirconnell in Ireland. Sent his heir over to make the king an
Austrian fieldmarshal now. Going to be trouble there one day. Wild
geese. O yes, every time. Don’t you forget that!
—The moot point is did he forget it, J. J. O’Molloy said quietly,
turning a horseshoe paperweight. Saving princes is a thank you job.
Professor MacHugh turned on him.
—And if not? he said.
—I’ll tell you how it was, Myles Crawford began. A Hungarian it was one
day...
LOST CAUSES NOBLE MARQUESS MENTIONED
—We were always loyal to lost causes, the professor said. Success for
us is the death of the intellect and of the imagination. We were never
loyal to the successful. We serve them. I teach the blatant Latin
language. I speak the tongue of a race the acme of whose mentality is
the maxim: time is money. Material domination. _Dominus!_ Lord! Where
is the spirituality? Lord Jesus? Lord Salisbury? A sofa in a westend
club. But the Greek!
KYRIE ELEISON!
A smile of light brightened his darkrimmed eyes, lengthened his long
lips.
—The Greek! he said again. _Kyrios!_ Shining word! The vowels the
Semite and the Saxon know not. _Kyrie!_ The radiance of the intellect.
I ought to profess Greek, the language of the mind. _Kyrie eleison!_
The closetmaker and the cloacamaker will never be lords of our spirit.
We are liege subjects of the catholic chivalry of Europe that foundered
at Trafalgar and of the empire of the spirit, not an _imperium,_ that
went under with the Athenian fleets at Aegospotami. Yes, yes. They went
under. Pyrrhus, misled by an oracle, made a last attempt to retrieve
the fortunes of Greece. Loyal to a lost cause.
He strode away from them towards the window.
—They went forth to battle, Mr O’Madden Burke said greyly, but they
always fell.
—Boohoo! Lenehan wept with a little noise. Owing to a brick received in
the latter half of the _matinée_. Poor, poor, poor Pyrrhus!
He whispered then near Stephen’s ear:
LENEHAN’S LIMERICK
—_There’s a ponderous pundit MacHugh
Who wears goggles of ebony hue.
As he mostly sees double
To wear them why trouble?
I can’t see the Joe Miller. Can you?_
In mourning for Sallust, Mulligan says. Whose mother is beastly dead.
Myles Crawford crammed the sheets into a sidepocket.
—That’ll be all right, he said. I’ll read the rest after. That’ll be
all right.
Lenehan extended his hands in protest.
—But my riddle! he said. What opera is like a railwayline?
—Opera? Mr O’Madden Burke’s sphinx face reriddled.
Lenehan announced gladly:
—_The Rose of Castile_. See the wheeze? Rows of cast steel. Gee!
He poked Mr O’Madden Burke mildly in the spleen. Mr O’Madden Burke fell
back with grace on his umbrella, feigning a gasp.
—Help! he sighed. I feel a strong weakness.
Lenehan, rising to tiptoe, fanned his face rapidly with the rustling
tissues.
The professor, returning by way of the files, swept his hand across
Stephen’s and Mr O’Madden Burke’s loose ties.
—Paris, past and present, he said. You look like communards.
—Like fellows who had blown up the Bastile, J. J. O’Molloy said in
quiet mockery. Or was it you shot the lord lieutenant of Finland
between you? You look as though you had done the deed. General
Bobrikoff.
OMNIUM GATHERUM
—We were only thinking about it, Stephen said.
—All the talents, Myles Crawford said. Law, the classics...
—The turf, Lenehan put in.
—Literature, the press.
—If Bloom were here, the professor said. The gentle art of
advertisement.
—And Madam Bloom, Mr O’Madden Burke added. The vocal muse. Dublin’s
prime favourite.
Lenehan gave a loud cough.
—Ahem! he said very softly. O, for a fresh of breath air! I caught a
cold in the park. The gate was open.
“YOU CAN DO IT!”
The editor laid a nervous hand on Stephen’s shoulder.
—I want you to write something for me, he said. Something with a bite
in it. You can do it. I see it in your face. _In the lexicon of
youth_...
See it in your face. See it in your eye. Lazy idle little schemer.
—Foot and mouth disease! the editor cried in scornful invective. Great
nationalist meeting in Borris-in-Ossory. All balls! Bulldosing the
public! Give them something with a bite in it. Put us all into it, damn
its soul. Father, Son and Holy Ghost and Jakes M’Carthy.
—We can all supply mental pabulum, Mr O’Madden Burke said.
Stephen raised his eyes to the bold unheeding stare.
—He wants you for the pressgang, J. J. O’Molloy said.
THE GREAT GALLAHER
—You can do it, Myles Crawford repeated, clenching his hand in
emphasis. Wait a minute. We’ll paralyse Europe as Ignatius Gallaher
used to say when he was on the shaughraun, doing billiardmarking in the
Clarence. Gallaher, that was a pressman for you. That was a pen. You
know how he made his mark? I’ll tell you. That was the smartest piece
of journalism ever known. That was in eightyone, sixth of May, time of
the invincibles, murder in the Phoenix park, before you were born, I
suppose. I’ll show you.
He pushed past them to the files.
—Look at here, he said turning. The _New York World_ cabled for a
special. Remember that time?
Professor MacHugh nodded.
—_New York World_, the editor said, excitedly pushing back his straw
hat. Where it took place. Tim Kelly, or Kavanagh I mean. Joe Brady and
the rest of them. Where Skin-the-Goat drove the car. Whole route, see?
—Skin-the-Goat, Mr O’Madden Burke said. Fitzharris. He has that
cabman’s shelter, they say, down there at Butt bridge. Holohan told me.
You know Holohan?
—Hop and carry one, is it? Myles Crawford said.
—And poor Gumley is down there too, so he told me, minding stones for
the corporation. A night watchman.
Stephen turned in surprise.
—Gumley? he said. You don’t say so? A friend of my father’s, is it?
—Never mind Gumley, Myles Crawford cried angrily. Let Gumley mind the
stones, see they don’t run away. Look at here. What did Ignatius
Gallaher do? I’ll tell you. Inspiration of genius. Cabled right away.
Have you _Weekly Freeman_ of 17 March? Right. Have you got that?
He flung back pages of the files and stuck his finger on a point.
—Take page four, advertisement for Bransome’s coffee, let us say. Have
you got that? Right.
The telephone whirred.
A DISTANT VOICE
—I’ll answer it, the professor said, going.
—B is parkgate. Good.
His finger leaped and struck point after point, vibrating.
—T is viceregal lodge. C is where murder took place. K is Knockmaroon
gate.
The loose flesh of his neck shook like a cock’s wattles. An illstarched
dicky jutted up and with a rude gesture he thrust it back into his
waistcoat.
—Hello? _Evening Telegraph_ here... Hello?... Who’s there?... Yes...
Yes... Yes.
—F to P is the route Skin-the-Goat drove the car for an alibi,
Inchicore, Roundtown, Windy Arbour, Palmerston Park, Ranelagh. F.A.B.P.
Got that? X is Davy’s publichouse in upper Leeson street.
The professor came to the inner door.
—Bloom is at the telephone, he said.
—Tell him go to hell, the editor said promptly. X is Davy’s
publichouse, see?
CLEVER, VERY
—Clever, Lenehan said. Very.
—Gave it to them on a hot plate, Myles Crawford said, the whole bloody
history.
Nightmare from which you will never awake.
—I saw it, the editor said proudly. I was present. Dick Adams, the
besthearted bloody Corkman the Lord ever put the breath of life in, and
myself.
Lenehan bowed to a shape of air, announcing:
—Madam, I’m Adam. And Able was I ere I saw Elba.
—History! Myles Crawford cried. The Old Woman of Prince’s street was
there first. There was weeping and gnashing of teeth over that. Out of
an advertisement. Gregor Grey made the design for it. That gave him the
leg up. Then Paddy Hooper worked Tay Pay who took him on to the _Star._
Now he’s got in with Blumenfeld. That’s press. That’s talent. Pyatt! He
was all their daddies!
—The father of scare journalism, Lenehan confirmed, and the
brother-in-law of Chris Callinan.
—Hello?... Are you there?... Yes, he’s here still. Come across
yourself.
—Where do you find a pressman like that now, eh? the editor cried.
He flung the pages down.
—Clamn dever, Lenehan said to Mr O’Madden Burke.
—Very smart, Mr O’Madden Burke said.
Professor MacHugh came from the inner office.
—Talking about the invincibles, he said, did you see that some hawkers
were up before the recorder...
—O yes, J. J. O’Molloy said eagerly. Lady Dudley was walking home
through the park to see all the trees that were blown down by that
cyclone last year and thought she’d buy a view of Dublin. And it turned
out to be a commemoration postcard of Joe Brady or Number One or
Skin-the-Goat. Right outside the viceregal lodge, imagine!
—They’re only in the hook and eye department, Myles Crawford said.
Psha! Press and the bar! Where have you a man now at the bar like those
fellows, like Whiteside, like Isaac Butt, like silvertongued O’Hagan.
Eh? Ah, bloody nonsense. Psha! Only in the halfpenny place.
His mouth continued to twitch unspeaking in nervous curls of disdain.
Would anyone wish that mouth for her kiss? How do you know? Why did you
write it then?
RHYMES AND REASONS
Mouth, south. Is the mouth south someway? Or the south a mouth? Must be
some. South, pout, out, shout, drouth. Rhymes: two men dressed the
same, looking the same, two by two.
     ........................ la tua pace
     .................. che parlar ti piace
     Mentre che il vento, come fa, si tace.
He saw them three by three, approaching girls, in green, in rose, in
russet, entwining, _per l’aer perso_, in mauve, in purple, _quella
pacifica oriafiamma_, gold of oriflamme, _di rimirar fè più ardenti._
But I old men, penitent, leadenfooted, underdarkneath the night: mouth
south: tomb womb.
—Speak up for yourself, Mr O’Madden Burke said.
SUFFICIENT FOR THE DAY...
J. J. O’Molloy, smiling palely, took up the gage.
—My dear Myles, he said, flinging his cigarette aside, you put a false
construction on my words. I hold no brief, as at present advised, for
the third profession _qua_ profession but your Cork legs are running
away with you. Why not bring in Henry Grattan and Flood and Demosthenes
and Edmund Burke? Ignatius Gallaher we all know and his Chapelizod
boss, Harmsworth of the farthing press, and his American cousin of the
Bowery guttersheet not to mention _Paddy Kelly’s Budget_, _Pue’s
Occurrences_ and our watchful friend _The Skibbereen Eagle_. Why bring
in a master of forensic eloquence like Whiteside? Sufficient for the
day is the newspaper thereof.
LINKS WITH BYGONE DAYS OF YORE
—Grattan and Flood wrote for this very paper, the editor cried in his
face. Irish volunteers. Where are you now? Established 1763. Dr Lucas.
Who have you now like John Philpot Curran? Psha!
—Well, J. J. O’Molloy said, Bushe K.C., for example.
—Bushe? the editor said. Well, yes: Bushe, yes. He has a strain of it
in his blood. Kendal Bushe or I mean Seymour Bushe.
—He would have been on the bench long ago, the professor said, only for
.... But no matter.
J. J. O’Molloy turned to Stephen and said quietly and slowly:
—One of the most polished periods I think I ever listened to in my life
fell from the lips of Seymour Bushe. It was in that case of fratricide,
the Childs murder case. Bushe defended him.
     _And in the porches of mine ear did pour._
By the way how did he find that out? He died in his sleep. Or the other
story, beast with two backs?
—What was that? the professor asked.
ITALIA, MAGISTRA ARTIUM
—He spoke on the law of evidence, J. J. O’Molloy said, of Roman justice
as contrasted with the earlier Mosaic code, the _lex talionis_. And he
cited the Moses of Michelangelo in the vatican.
—Ha.
—A few wellchosen words, Lenehan prefaced. Silence!
Pause. J. J. O’Molloy took out his cigarettecase.
False lull. Something quite ordinary.
Messenger took out his matchbox thoughtfully and lit his cigar.
I have often thought since on looking back over that strange time that
it was that small act, trivial in itself, that striking of that match,
that determined the whole aftercourse of both our lives.
A POLISHED PERIOD
J. J. O’Molloy resumed, moulding his words:
—He said of it: _that stony effigy in frozen music, horned and
terrible, of the human form divine, that eternal symbol of wisdom and
of prophecy which, if aught that the imagination or the hand of
sculptor has wrought in marble of soultransfigured and of
soultransfiguring deserves to live, deserves to live._
His slim hand with a wave graced echo and fall.
—Fine! Myles Crawford said at once.
—The divine afflatus, Mr O’Madden Burke said.
—You like it? J. J. O’Molloy asked Stephen.
Stephen, his blood wooed by grace of language and gesture, blushed. He
took a cigarette from the case. J. J. O’Molloy offered his case to
Myles Crawford. Lenehan lit their cigarettes as before and took his
trophy, saying:
—Muchibus thankibus.
A MAN OF HIGH MORALE
—Professor Magennis was speaking to me about you, J. J. O’Molloy said
to Stephen. What do you think really of that hermetic crowd, the opal
hush poets: A. E. the mastermystic? That Blavatsky woman started it.
She was a nice old bag of tricks. A. E. has been telling some yankee
interviewer that you came to him in the small hours of the morning to
ask him about planes of consciousness. Magennis thinks you must have
been pulling A. E.’s leg. He is a man of the very highest morale,
Magennis.
Speaking about me. What did he say? What did he say? What did he say
about me? Don’t ask.
—No, thanks, professor MacHugh said, waving the cigarettecase aside.
Wait a moment. Let me say one thing. The finest display of oratory I
ever heard was a speech made by John F Taylor at the college historical
society. Mr Justice Fitzgibbon, the present lord justice of appeal, had
spoken and the paper under debate was an essay (new for those days),
advocating the revival of the Irish tongue.
He turned towards Myles Crawford and said:
—You know Gerald Fitzgibbon. Then you can imagine the style of his
discourse.
—He is sitting with Tim Healy, J. J. O’Molloy said, rumour has it, on
the Trinity college estates commission.
—He is sitting with a sweet thing, Myles Crawford said, in a child’s
frock. Go on. Well?
—It was the speech, mark you, the professor said, of a finished orator,
full of courteous haughtiness and pouring in chastened diction I will
not say the vials of his wrath but pouring the proud man’s contumely
upon the new movement. It was then a new movement. We were weak,
therefore worthless.
He closed his long thin lips an instant but, eager to be on, raised an
outspanned hand to his spectacles and, with trembling thumb and
ringfinger touching lightly the black rims, steadied them to a new
focus.
IMPROMPTU
In ferial tone he addressed J. J. O’Molloy:
—Taylor had come there, you must know, from a sickbed. That he had
prepared his speech I do not believe for there was not even one
shorthandwriter in the hall. His dark lean face had a growth of shaggy
beard round it. He wore a loose white silk neckcloth and altogether he
looked (though he was not) a dying man.
His gaze turned at once but slowly from J. J. O’Molloy’s towards
Stephen’s face and then bent at once to the ground, seeking. His
unglazed linen collar appeared behind his bent head, soiled by his
withering hair. Still seeking, he said:
—When Fitzgibbon’s speech had ended John F Taylor rose to reply.
Briefly, as well as I can bring them to mind, his words were these.
He raised his head firmly. His eyes bethought themselves once more.
Witless shellfish swam in the gross lenses to and fro, seeking outlet.
He began:
_—Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen: Great was my admiration in
listening to the remarks addressed to the youth of Ireland a moment
since by my learned friend. It seemed to me that I had been transported
into a country far away from this country, into an age remote from this
age, that I stood in ancient Egypt and that I was listening to the
speech of some highpriest of that land addressed to the youthful
Moses._
His listeners held their cigarettes poised to hear, their smokes
ascending in frail stalks that flowered with his speech. _And let our
crooked smokes._ Noble words coming. Look out. Could you try your hand
at it yourself?
_—And it seemed to me that I heard the voice of that Egyptian
highpriest raised in a tone of like haughtiness and like pride. I heard
his words and their meaning was revealed to me._
FROM THE FATHERS
It was revealed to me that those things are good which yet are
corrupted which neither if they were supremely good nor unless they
were good could be corrupted. Ah, curse you! That’s saint Augustine.
_—Why will you jews not accept our culture, our religion and our
language? You are a tribe of nomad herdsmen: we are a mighty people.
You have no cities nor no wealth: our cities are hives of humanity and
our galleys, trireme and quadrireme, laden with all manner merchandise
furrow the waters of the known globe. You have but emerged from
primitive conditions: we have a literature, a priesthood, an agelong
history and a polity._
Nile.
Child, man, effigy.
By the Nilebank the babemaries kneel, cradle of bulrushes: a man supple
in combat: stonehorned, stonebearded, heart of stone.
_—You pray to a local and obscure idol: our temples, majestic and
mysterious, are the abodes of Isis and Osiris, of Horus and Ammon Ra.
Yours serfdom, awe and humbleness: ours thunder and the seas. Israel is
weak and few are her children: Egypt is an host and terrible are her
arms. Vagrants and daylabourers are you called: the world trembles at
our name._
A dumb belch of hunger cleft his speech. He lifted his voice above it
boldly:
_—But, ladies and gentlemen, had the youthful Moses listened to and
accepted that view of life, had he bowed his head and bowed his will
and bowed his spirit before that arrogant admonition he would never
have brought the chosen people out of their house of bondage, nor
followed the pillar of the cloud by day. He would never have spoken
with the Eternal amid lightnings on Sinai’s mountaintop nor ever have
come down with the light of inspiration shining in his countenance and
bearing in his arms the tables of the law, graven in the language of
the outlaw._
He ceased and looked at them, enjoying a silence.
OMINOUS—FOR HIM!
J. J. O’Molloy said not without regret:
—And yet he died without having entered the land of promise.
—A—sudden—at—the—moment—though—from—lingering—illness—often—previously—
expectorated—demise, Lenehan added. And with a great future behind him.
The troop of bare feet was heard rushing along the hallway and
pattering up the staircase.
—That is oratory, the professor said uncontradicted.
Gone with the wind. Hosts at Mullaghmast and Tara of the kings. Miles
of ears of porches. The tribune’s words, howled and scattered to the
four winds. A people sheltered within his voice. Dead noise. Akasic
records of all that ever anywhere wherever was. Love and laud him: me
no more.
I have money.
—Gentlemen, Stephen said. As the next motion on the agenda paper may I
suggest that the house do now adjourn?
—You take my breath away. It is not perchance a French compliment? Mr
O’Madden Burke asked. ’Tis the hour, methinks, when the winejug,
metaphorically speaking, is most grateful in Ye ancient hostelry.
—That it be and hereby is resolutely resolved. All that are in favour
say ay, Lenehan announced. The contrary no. I declare it carried. To
which particular boosing shed...? My casting vote is: Mooney’s!
He led the way, admonishing:
—We will sternly refuse to partake of strong waters, will we not? Yes,
we will not. By no manner of means.
Mr O’Madden Burke, following close, said with an ally’s lunge of his
umbrella:
—Lay on, Macduff!
—Chip of the old block! the editor cried, clapping Stephen on the
shoulder. Let us go. Where are those blasted keys?
He fumbled in his pocket pulling out the crushed typesheets.
—Foot and mouth. I know. That’ll be all right. That’ll go in. Where are
they? That’s all right.
He thrust the sheets back and went into the inner office.
LET US HOPE
J. J. O’Molloy, about to follow him in, said quietly to Stephen:
—I hope you will live to see it published. Myles, one moment.
He went into the inner office, closing the door behind him.
—Come along, Stephen, the professor said. That is fine, isn’t it? It
has the prophetic vision. _Fuit Ilium!_ The sack of windy Troy.
Kingdoms of this world. The masters of the Mediterranean are fellaheen
today.
The first newsboy came pattering down the stairs at their heels and
rushed out into the street, yelling:
—Racing special!
Dublin. I have much, much to learn.
They turned to the left along Abbey street.
—I have a vision too, Stephen said.
—Yes? the professor said, skipping to get into step. Crawford will
follow.
Another newsboy shot past them, yelling as he ran:
—Racing special!
DEAR DIRTY DUBLIN
Dubliners.
—Two Dublin vestals, Stephen said, elderly and pious, have lived fifty
and fiftythree years in Fumbally’s lane.
—Where is that? the professor asked.
—Off Blackpitts, Stephen said.
Damp night reeking of hungry dough. Against the wall. Face glistering
tallow under her fustian shawl. Frantic hearts. Akasic records.
Quicker, darlint!
On now. Dare it. Let there be life.
—They want to see the views of Dublin from the top of Nelson’s pillar.
They save up three and tenpence in a red tin letterbox moneybox. They
shake out the threepenny bits and sixpences and coax out the pennies
with the blade of a knife. Two and three in silver and one and seven in
coppers. They put on their bonnets and best clothes and take their
umbrellas for fear it may come on to rain.
—Wise virgins, professor MacHugh said.
LIFE ON THE RAW
—They buy one and fourpenceworth of brawn and four slices of panloaf at
the north city diningrooms in Marlborough street from Miss Kate
Collins, proprietress... They purchase four and twenty ripe plums from
a girl at the foot of Nelson’s pillar to take off the thirst of the
brawn. They give two threepenny bits to the gentleman at the turnstile
and begin to waddle slowly up the winding staircase, grunting,
encouraging each other, afraid of the dark, panting, one asking the
other have you the brawn, praising God and the Blessed Virgin,
threatening to come down, peeping at the airslits. Glory be to God.
They had no idea it was that high.
Their names are Anne Kearns and Florence MacCabe. Anne Kearns has the
lumbago for which she rubs on Lourdes water, given her by a lady who
got a bottleful from a passionist father. Florence MacCabe takes a
crubeen and a bottle of double X for supper every Saturday.
—Antithesis, the professor said nodding twice. Vestal virgins. I can
see them. What’s keeping our friend?
He turned.
A bevy of scampering newsboys rushed down the steps, scattering in all
directions, yelling, their white papers fluttering. Hard after them
Myles Crawford appeared on the steps, his hat aureoling his scarlet
face, talking with J. J. O’Molloy.
—Come along, the professor cried, waving his arm.
He set off again to walk by Stephen’s side.
RETURN OF BLOOM
—Yes, he said. I see them.
Mr Bloom, breathless, caught in a whirl of wild newsboys near the
offices of the _Irish Catholic_ and _Dublin Penny Journal_, called:
—Mr Crawford! A moment!
—_Telegraph_! Racing special!
—What is it? Myles Crawford said, falling back a pace.
A newsboy cried in Mr Bloom’s face:
—Terrible tragedy in Rathmines! A child bit by a bellows!
INTERVIEW WITH THE EDITOR
—Just this ad, Mr Bloom said, pushing through towards the steps,
puffing, and taking the cutting from his pocket. I spoke with Mr Keyes
just now. He’ll give a renewal for two months, he says. After he’ll
see. But he wants a par to call attention in the _Telegraph_ too, the
Saturday pink. And he wants it copied if it’s not too late I told
councillor Nannetti from the _Kilkenny People_. I can have access to it
in the national library. House of keys, don’t you see? His name is
Keyes. It’s a play on the name. But he practically promised he’d give
the renewal. But he wants just a little puff. What will I tell him, Mr
Crawford?
K.M.A.
—Will you tell him he can kiss my arse? Myles Crawford said throwing
out his arm for emphasis. Tell him that straight from the stable.
A bit nervy. Look out for squalls. All off for a drink. Arm in arm.
Lenehan’s yachting cap on the cadge beyond. Usual blarney. Wonder is
that young Dedalus the moving spirit. Has a good pair of boots on him
today. Last time I saw him he had his heels on view. Been walking in
muck somewhere. Careless chap. What was he doing in Irishtown?
—Well, Mr Bloom said, his eyes returning, if I can get the design I
suppose it’s worth a short par. He’d give the ad, I think. I’ll tell
him...
K.M.R.I.A.
—He can kiss my royal Irish arse, Myles Crawford cried loudly over his
shoulder. Any time he likes, tell him.
While Mr Bloom stood weighing the point and about to smile he strode on
jerkily.
RAISING THE WIND
—_Nulla bona_, Jack, he said, raising his hand to his chin. I’m up to
here. I’ve been through the hoop myself. I was looking for a fellow to
back a bill for me no later than last week. Sorry, Jack. You must take
the will for the deed. With a heart and a half if I could raise the
wind anyhow.
J. J. O’Molloy pulled a long face and walked on silently. They caught
up on the others and walked abreast.
—When they have eaten the brawn and the bread and wiped their twenty
fingers in the paper the bread was wrapped in they go nearer to the
railings.
—Something for you, the professor explained to Myles Crawford. Two old
Dublin women on the top of Nelson’s pillar.
SOME COLUMN!—THAT’S WHAT WADDLER ONE SAID
—That’s new, Myles Crawford said. That’s copy. Out for the waxies’
Dargle. Two old trickies, what?
—But they are afraid the pillar will fall, Stephen went on. They see
the roofs and argue about where the different churches are: Rathmines’
blue dome, Adam and Eve’s, saint Laurence O’Toole’s. But it makes them
giddy to look so they pull up their skirts...
THOSE SLIGHTLY RAMBUNCTIOUS FEMALES
—Easy all, Myles Crawford said. No poetic licence. We’re in the
archdiocese here.
—And settle down on their striped petticoats, peering up at the statue
of the onehandled adulterer.
—Onehandled adulterer! the professor cried. I like that. I see the
idea. I see what you mean.
DAMES DONATE DUBLIN’S CITS SPEEDPILLS VELOCITOUS AEROLITHS, BELIEF
—It gives them a crick in their necks, Stephen said, and they are too
tired to look up or down or to speak. They put the bag of plums between
them and eat the plums out of it, one after another, wiping off with
their handkerchiefs the plumjuice that dribbles out of their mouths and
spitting the plumstones slowly out between the railings.
He gave a sudden loud young laugh as a close. Lenehan and Mr O’Madden
Burke, hearing, turned, beckoned and led on across towards Mooney’s.
—Finished? Myles Crawford said. So long as they do no worse.
SOPHIST WALLOPS HAUGHTY HELEN SQUARE ON PROBOSCIS. SPARTANS GNASH
MOLARS. ITHACANS VOW PEN IS CHAMP.
—You remind me of Antisthenes, the professor said, a disciple of
Gorgias, the sophist. It is said of him that none could tell if he were
bitterer against others or against himself. He was the son of a noble
and a bondwoman. And he wrote a book in which he took away the palm of
beauty from Argive Helen and handed it to poor Penelope.
Poor Penelope. Penelope Rich.
They made ready to cross O’Connell street.
HELLO THERE, CENTRAL!
At various points along the eight lines tramcars with motionless
trolleys stood in their tracks, bound for or from Rathmines,
Rathfarnham, Blackrock, Kingstown and Dalkey, Sandymount Green,
Ringsend and Sandymount Tower, Donnybrook, Palmerston Park and Upper
Rathmines, all still, becalmed in short circuit. Hackney cars, cabs,
delivery waggons, mailvans, private broughams, aerated mineral water
floats with rattling crates of bottles, rattled, rolled, horsedrawn,
rapidly.
WHAT?—AND LIKEWISE—WHERE?
—But what do you call it? Myles Crawford asked. Where did they get the
plums?
VIRGILIAN, SAYS PEDAGOGUE. SOPHOMORE PLUMPS FOR OLD MAN MOSES.
—Call it, wait, the professor said, opening his long lips wide to
reflect. Call it, let me see. Call it: _deus nobis hæc otia fecit._
—No, Stephen said. I call it _A Pisgah Sight of Palestine_ or _The
Parable of The Plums._
—I see, the professor said.
He laughed richly.
—I see, he said again with new pleasure. Moses and the promised land.
We gave him that idea, he added to J. J. O’Molloy.
HORATIO IS CYNOSURE THIS FAIR JUNE DAY
J. J. O’Molloy sent a weary sidelong glance towards the statue and held
his peace.
—I see, the professor said.
He halted on sir John Gray’s pavement island and peered aloft at Nelson
through the meshes of his wry smile.
DIMINISHED DIGITS PROVE TOO TITILLATING FOR FRISKY FRUMPS. ANNE
WIMBLES, FLO WANGLES—YET CAN YOU BLAME THEM?
—Onehandled adulterer, he said smiling grimly. That tickles me, I must
say.
—Tickled the old ones too, Myles Crawford said, if the God Almighty’s
truth was known.
[ 8 ]
Pineapple rock, lemon platt, butter scotch. A sugarsticky girl
shovelling scoopfuls of creams for a christian brother. Some school
treat. Bad for their tummies. Lozenge and comfit manufacturer to His
Majesty the King. God. Save. Our. Sitting on his throne sucking red
jujubes white.
A sombre Y. M. C. A. young man, watchful among the warm sweet fumes of
Graham Lemon’s, placed a throwaway in a hand of Mr Bloom.
Heart to heart talks.
Bloo... Me? No.
Blood of the Lamb.
His slow feet walked him riverward, reading. Are you saved? All are
washed in the blood of the lamb. God wants blood victim. Birth, hymen,
martyr, war, foundation of a building, sacrifice, kidney burntoffering,
druids’ altars. Elijah is coming. Dr John Alexander Dowie restorer of
the church in Zion is coming.
     Is coming! Is coming!! Is coming!!!
     All heartily welcome.
Paying game. Torry and Alexander last year. Polygamy. His wife will put
the stopper on that. Where was that ad some Birmingham firm the
luminous crucifix. Our Saviour. Wake up in the dead of night and see
him on the wall, hanging. Pepper’s ghost idea. Iron Nails Ran In.
Phosphorus it must be done with. If you leave a bit of codfish for
instance. I could see the bluey silver over it. Night I went down to
the pantry in the kitchen. Don’t like all the smells in it waiting to
rush out. What was it she wanted? The Malaga raisins. Thinking of
Spain. Before Rudy was born. The phosphorescence, that bluey greeny.
Very good for the brain.
From Butler’s monument house corner he glanced along Bachelor’s walk.
Dedalus’ daughter there still outside Dillon’s auctionrooms. Must be
selling off some old furniture. Knew her eyes at once from the father.
Lobbing about waiting for him. Home always breaks up when the mother
goes. Fifteen children he had. Birth every year almost. That’s in their
theology or the priest won’t give the poor woman the confession, the
absolution. Increase and multiply. Did you ever hear such an idea? Eat
you out of house and home. No families themselves to feed. Living on
the fat of the land. Their butteries and larders. I’d like to see them
do the black fast Yom Kippur. Crossbuns. One meal and a collation for
fear he’d collapse on the altar. A housekeeper of one of those fellows
if you could pick it out of her. Never pick it out of her. Like getting
£. s. d. out of him. Does himself well. No guests. All for number one.
Watching his water. Bring your own bread and butter. His reverence:
mum’s the word.
Good Lord, that poor child’s dress is in flitters. Underfed she looks
too. Potatoes and marge, marge and potatoes. It’s after they feel it.
Proof of the pudding. Undermines the constitution.
As he set foot on O’Connell bridge a puffball of smoke plumed up from
the parapet. Brewery barge with export stout. England. Sea air sours
it, I heard. Be interesting some day get a pass through Hancock to see
the brewery. Regular world in itself. Vats of porter wonderful. Rats
get in too. Drink themselves bloated as big as a collie floating. Dead
drunk on the porter. Drink till they puke again like christians.
Imagine drinking that! Rats: vats. Well, of course, if we knew all the
things.
Looking down he saw flapping strongly, wheeling between the gaunt
quaywalls, gulls. Rough weather outside. If I threw myself down? Reuben
J’s son must have swallowed a good bellyful of that sewage. One and
eightpence too much. Hhhhm. It’s the droll way he comes out with the
things. Knows how to tell a story too.
They wheeled lower. Looking for grub. Wait.
He threw down among them a crumpled paper ball. Elijah thirtytwo feet
per sec is com. Not a bit. The ball bobbed unheeded on the wake of
swells, floated under by the bridgepiers. Not such damn fools. Also the
day I threw that stale cake out of the Erin’s King picked it up in the
wake fifty yards astern. Live by their wits. They wheeled, flapping.
     The hungry famished gull
     Flaps o’er the waters dull.
That is how poets write, the similar sounds. But then Shakespeare has
no rhymes: blank verse. The flow of the language it is. The thoughts.
Solemn.
     Hamlet, I am thy father’s spirit
     Doomed for a certain time to walk the earth.
 —Two apples a penny! Two for a penny!
His gaze passed over the glazed apples serried on her stand.
Australians they must be this time of year. Shiny peels: polishes them
up with a rag or a handkerchief.
Wait. Those poor birds.
He halted again and bought from the old applewoman two Banbury cakes
for a penny and broke the brittle paste and threw its fragments down
into the Liffey. See that? The gulls swooped silently, two, then all
from their heights, pouncing on prey. Gone. Every morsel.
Aware of their greed and cunning he shook the powdery crumb from his
hands. They never expected that. Manna. Live on fish, fishy flesh they
have, all seabirds, gulls, seagoose. Swans from Anna Liffey swim down
here sometimes to preen themselves. No accounting for tastes. Wonder
what kind is swanmeat. Robinson Crusoe had to live on them.
They wheeled flapping weakly. I’m not going to throw any more. Penny
quite enough. Lot of thanks I get. Not even a caw. They spread foot and
mouth disease too. If you cram a turkey say on chestnutmeal it tastes
like that. Eat pig like pig. But then why is it that saltwater fish are
not salty? How is that?
His eyes sought answer from the river and saw a rowboat rock at anchor
on the treacly swells lazily its plastered board.
     Kino’s
     11/—
     Trousers
Good idea that. Wonder if he pays rent to the corporation. How can you
own water really? It’s always flowing in a stream, never the same,
which in the stream of life we trace. Because life is a stream. All
kinds of places are good for ads. That quack doctor for the clap used
to be stuck up in all the greenhouses. Never see it now. Strictly
confidential. Dr Hy Franks. Didn’t cost him a red like Maginni the
dancing master self advertisement. Got fellows to stick them up or
stick them up himself for that matter on the q. t. running in to loosen
a button. Flybynight. Just the place too. POST NO BILLS. POST 110
PILLS. Some chap with a dose burning him.
If he...?
O!
Eh?
No... No.
No, no. I don’t believe it. He wouldn’t surely?
No, no.
Mr Bloom moved forward, raising his troubled eyes. Think no more about
that. After one. Timeball on the ballastoffice is down. Dunsink time.
Fascinating little book that is of sir Robert Ball’s. Parallax. I never
exactly understood. There’s a priest. Could ask him. Par it’s Greek:
parallel, parallax. Met him pike hoses she called it till I told her
about the transmigration. O rocks!
Mr Bloom smiled O rocks at two windows of the ballastoffice. She’s
right after all. Only big words for ordinary things on account of the
sound. She’s not exactly witty. Can be rude too. Blurt out what I was
thinking. Still, I don’t know. She used to say Ben Dollard had a base
barreltone voice. He has legs like barrels and you’d think he was
singing into a barrel. Now, isn’t that wit. They used to call him big
Ben. Not half as witty as calling him base barreltone. Appetite like an
albatross. Get outside of a baron of beef. Powerful man he was at
stowing away number one Bass. Barrel of Bass. See? It all works out.
A procession of whitesmocked sandwichmen marched slowly towards him
along the gutter, scarlet sashes across their boards. Bargains. Like
that priest they are this morning: we have sinned: we have suffered. He
read the scarlet letters on their five tall white hats: H. E. L. Y. S.
Wisdom Hely’s. Y lagging behind drew a chunk of bread from under his
foreboard, crammed it into his mouth and munched as he walked. Our
staple food. Three bob a day, walking along the gutters, street after
street. Just keep skin and bone together, bread and skilly. They are
not Boyl: no, M’Glade’s men. Doesn’t bring in any business either. I
suggested to him about a transparent showcart with two smart girls
sitting inside writing letters, copybooks, envelopes, blottingpaper. I
bet that would have caught on. Smart girls writing something catch the
eye at once. Everyone dying to know what she’s writing. Get twenty of
them round you if you stare at nothing. Have a finger in the pie. Women
too. Curiosity. Pillar of salt. Wouldn’t have it of course because he
didn’t think of it himself first. Or the inkbottle I suggested with a
false stain of black celluloid. His ideas for ads like Plumtree’s
potted under the obituaries, cold meat department. You can’t lick ’em.
What? Our envelopes. Hello, Jones, where are you going? Can’t stop,
Robinson, I am hastening to purchase the only reliable inkeraser
_Kansell,_ sold by Hely’s Ltd, 85 Dame street. Well out of that ruck I
am. Devil of a job it was collecting accounts of those convents.
Tranquilla convent. That was a nice nun there, really sweet face.
Wimple suited her small head. Sister? Sister? I am sure she was crossed
in love by her eyes. Very hard to bargain with that sort of a woman. I
disturbed her at her devotions that morning. But glad to communicate
with the outside world. Our great day, she said. Feast of Our Lady of
Mount Carmel. Sweet name too: caramel. She knew I, I think she knew by
the way she. If she had married she would have changed. I suppose they
really were short of money. Fried everything in the best butter all the
same. No lard for them. My heart’s broke eating dripping. They like
buttering themselves in and out. Molly tasting it, her veil up. Sister?
Pat Claffey, the pawnbroker’s daughter. It was a nun they say invented
barbed wire.
He crossed Westmoreland street when apostrophe S had plodded by. Rover
cycleshop. Those races are on today. How long ago is that? Year Phil
Gilligan died. We were in Lombard street west. Wait: was in Thom’s. Got
the job in Wisdom Hely’s year we married. Six years. Ten years ago:
ninetyfour he died yes that’s right the big fire at Arnott’s. Val
Dillon was lord mayor. The Glencree dinner. Alderman Robert O’Reilly
emptying the port into his soup before the flag fell. Bobbob lapping it
for the inner alderman. Couldn’t hear what the band played. For what we
have already received may the Lord make us. Milly was a kiddy then.
Molly had that elephantgrey dress with the braided frogs. Mantailored
with selfcovered buttons. She didn’t like it because I sprained my
ankle first day she wore choir picnic at the Sugarloaf. As if that. Old
Goodwin’s tall hat done up with some sticky stuff. Flies’ picnic too.
Never put a dress on her back like it. Fitted her like a glove,
shoulders and hips. Just beginning to plump it out well. Rabbitpie we
had that day. People looking after her.
Happy. Happier then. Snug little room that was with the red wallpaper.
Dockrell’s, one and ninepence a dozen. Milly’s tubbing night. American
soap I bought: elderflower. Cosy smell of her bathwater. Funny she
looked soaped all over. Shapely too. Now photography. Poor papa’s
daguerreotype atelier he told me of. Hereditary taste.
He walked along the curbstone.
Stream of life. What was the name of that priestylooking chap was
always squinting in when he passed? Weak eyes, woman. Stopped in
Citron’s saint Kevin’s parade. Pen something. Pendennis? My memory is
getting. Pen ...? Of course it’s years ago. Noise of the trams
probably. Well, if he couldn’t remember the dayfather’s name that he
sees every day.
Bartell d’Arcy was the tenor, just coming out then. Seeing her home
after practice. Conceited fellow with his waxedup moustache. Gave her
that song _Winds that blow from the south_.
Windy night that was I went to fetch her there was that lodge meeting
on about those lottery tickets after Goodwin’s concert in the
supperroom or oakroom of the Mansion house. He and I behind. Sheet of
her music blew out of my hand against the High school railings. Lucky
it didn’t. Thing like that spoils the effect of a night for her.
Professor Goodwin linking her in front. Shaky on his pins, poor old
sot. His farewell concerts. Positively last appearance on any stage.
May be for months and may be for never. Remember her laughing at the
wind, her blizzard collar up. Corner of Harcourt road remember that
gust. Brrfoo! Blew up all her skirts and her boa nearly smothered old
Goodwin. She did get flushed in the wind. Remember when we got home
raking up the fire and frying up those pieces of lap of mutton for her
supper with the Chutney sauce she liked. And the mulled rum. Could see
her in the bedroom from the hearth unclamping the busk of her stays:
white.
Swish and soft flop her stays made on the bed. Always warm from her.
Always liked to let her self out. Sitting there after till near two
taking out her hairpins. Milly tucked up in beddyhouse. Happy. Happy.
That was the night...
—O, Mr Bloom, how do you do?
—O, how do you do, Mrs Breen?
—No use complaining. How is Molly those times? Haven’t seen her for
ages.
—In the pink, Mr Bloom said gaily. Milly has a position down in
Mullingar, you know.
—Go away! Isn’t that grand for her?
—Yes. In a photographer’s there. Getting on like a house on fire. How
are all your charges?
—All on the baker’s list, Mrs Breen said.
How many has she? No other in sight.
—You’re in black, I see. You have no...
—No, Mr Bloom said. I have just come from a funeral.
Going to crop up all day, I foresee. Who’s dead, when and what did he
die of? Turn up like a bad penny.
—O, dear me, Mrs Breen said. I hope it wasn’t any near relation.
May as well get her sympathy.
—Dignam, Mr Bloom said. An old friend of mine. He died quite suddenly,
poor fellow. Heart trouble, I believe. Funeral was this morning.
     Your funeral’s tomorrow
     While you’re coming through the rye.
     Diddlediddle dumdum
     Diddlediddle...
—Sad to lose the old friends, Mrs Breen’s womaneyes said melancholily.
Now that’s quite enough about that. Just: quietly: husband.
—And your lord and master?
Mrs Breen turned up her two large eyes. Hasn’t lost them anyhow.
—O, don’t be talking! she said. He’s a caution to rattlesnakes. He’s in
there now with his lawbooks finding out the law of libel. He has me
heartscalded. Wait till I show you.
Hot mockturtle vapour and steam of newbaked jampuffs rolypoly poured
out from Harrison’s. The heavy noonreek tickled the top of Mr Bloom’s
gullet. Want to make good pastry, butter, best flour, Demerara sugar,
or they’d taste it with the hot tea. Or is it from her? A barefoot arab
stood over the grating, breathing in the fumes. Deaden the gnaw of
hunger that way. Pleasure or pain is it? Penny dinner. Knife and fork
chained to the table.
Opening her handbag, chipped leather. Hatpin: ought to have a guard on
those things. Stick it in a chap’s eye in the tram. Rummaging. Open.
Money. Please take one. Devils if they lose sixpence. Raise Cain.
Husband barging. Where’s the ten shillings I gave you on Monday? Are
you feeding your little brother’s family? Soiled handkerchief:
medicinebottle. Pastille that was fell. What is she?...
—There must be a new moon out, she said. He’s always bad then. Do you
know what he did last night?
Her hand ceased to rummage. Her eyes fixed themselves on him, wide in
alarm, yet smiling.
—What? Mr Bloom asked.
Let her speak. Look straight in her eyes. I believe you. Trust me.
—Woke me up in the night, she said. Dream he had, a nightmare.
Indiges.
—Said the ace of spades was walking up the stairs.
—The ace of spades! Mr Bloom said.
She took a folded postcard from her handbag.
—Read that, she said. He got it this morning.
—What is it? Mr Bloom asked, taking the card. U. P.?
—U. p: up, she said. Someone taking a rise out of him. It’s a great
shame for them whoever he is.
—Indeed it is, Mr Bloom said.
She took back the card, sighing.
—And now he’s going round to Mr Menton’s office. He’s going to take an
action for ten thousand pounds, he says.
She folded the card into her untidy bag and snapped the catch.
Same blue serge dress she had two years ago, the nap bleaching. Seen
its best days. Wispish hair over her ears. And that dowdy toque: three
old grapes to take the harm out of it. Shabby genteel. She used to be a
tasty dresser. Lines round her mouth. Only a year or so older than
Molly.
See the eye that woman gave her, passing. Cruel. The unfair sex.
He looked still at her, holding back behind his look his discontent.
Pungent mockturtle oxtail mulligatawny. I’m hungry too. Flakes of
pastry on the gusset of her dress: daub of sugary flour stuck to her
cheek. Rhubarb tart with liberal fillings, rich fruit interior. Josie
Powell that was. In Luke Doyle’s long ago. Dolphin’s Barn, the
charades. U. p: up.
Change the subject.
—Do you ever see anything of Mrs Beaufoy? Mr Bloom asked.
—Mina Purefoy? she said.
Philip Beaufoy I was thinking. Playgoers’ Club. Matcham often thinks of
the masterstroke. Did I pull the chain? Yes. The last act.
—Yes.
—I just called to ask on the way in is she over it. She’s in the
lying-in hospital in Holles street. Dr Horne got her in. She’s three
days bad now.
—O, Mr Bloom said. I’m sorry to hear that.
—Yes, Mrs Breen said. And a houseful of kids at home. It’s a very stiff
birth, the nurse told me.
—O, Mr Bloom said.
His heavy pitying gaze absorbed her news. His tongue clacked in
compassion. Dth! Dth!
—I’m sorry to hear that, he said. Poor thing! Three days! That’s
terrible for her.
Mrs Breen nodded.
—She was taken bad on the Tuesday...
Mr Bloom touched her funnybone gently, warning her:
—Mind! Let this man pass.
A bony form strode along the curbstone from the river staring with a
rapt gaze into the sunlight through a heavystringed glass. Tight as a
skullpiece a tiny hat gripped his head. From his arm a folded dustcoat,
a stick and an umbrella dangled to his stride.
—Watch him, Mr Bloom said. He always walks outside the lampposts.
Watch!
—Who is he if it’s a fair question? Mrs Breen asked. Is he dotty?
—His name is Cashel Boyle O’Connor Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell, Mr
Bloom said smiling. Watch!
—He has enough of them, she said. Denis will be like that one of these
days.
She broke off suddenly.
—There he is, she said. I must go after him. Goodbye. Remember me to
Molly, won’t you?
—I will, Mr Bloom said.
He watched her dodge through passers towards the shopfronts. Denis
Breen in skimpy frockcoat and blue canvas shoes shuffled out of
Harrison’s hugging two heavy tomes to his ribs. Blown in from the bay.
Like old times. He suffered her to overtake him without surprise and
thrust his dull grey beard towards her, his loose jaw wagging as he
spoke earnestly.
Meshuggah. Off his chump.
Mr Bloom walked on again easily, seeing ahead of him in sunlight the
tight skullpiece, the dangling stickumbrelladustcoat. Going the two
days. Watch him! Out he goes again. One way of getting on in the world.
And that other old mosey lunatic in those duds. Hard time she must have
with him.
U. p: up. I’ll take my oath that’s Alf Bergan or Richie Goulding. Wrote
it for a lark in the Scotch house I bet anything. Round to Menton’s
office. His oyster eyes staring at the postcard. Be a feast for the
gods.
He passed the _Irish Times_. There might be other answers lying there.
Like to answer them all. Good system for criminals. Code. At their
lunch now. Clerk with the glasses there doesn’t know me. O, leave them
there to simmer. Enough bother wading through fortyfour of them.
Wanted, smart lady typist to aid gentleman in literary work. I called
you naughty darling because I do not like that other world. Please tell
me what is the meaning. Please tell me what perfume does your wife.
Tell me who made the world. The way they spring those questions on you.
And the other one Lizzie Twigg. My literary efforts have had the good
fortune to meet with the approval of the eminent poet A. E. (Mr Geo.
Russell). No time to do her hair drinking sloppy tea with a book of
poetry.
Best paper by long chalks for a small ad. Got the provinces now. Cook
and general, exc. cuisine, housemaid kept. Wanted live man for spirit
counter. Resp. girl (R.C.) wishes to hear of post in fruit or pork
shop. James Carlisle made that. Six and a half per cent dividend. Made
a big deal on Coates’s shares. Ca’ canny. Cunning old Scotch hunks. All
the toady news. Our gracious and popular vicereine. Bought the _Irish
Field_ now. Lady Mountcashel has quite recovered after her confinement
and rode out with the Ward Union staghounds at the enlargement
yesterday at Rathoath. Uneatable fox. Pothunters too. Fear injects
juices make it tender enough for them. Riding astride. Sit her horse
like a man. Weightcarrying huntress. No sidesaddle or pillion for her,
not for Joe. First to the meet and in at the death. Strong as a brood
mare some of those horsey women. Swagger around livery stables. Toss
off a glass of brandy neat while you’d say knife. That one at the
Grosvenor this morning. Up with her on the car: wishswish. Stonewall or
fivebarred gate put her mount to it. Think that pugnosed driver did it
out of spite. Who is this she was like? O yes! Mrs Miriam Dandrade that
sold me her old wraps and black underclothes in the Shelbourne hotel.
Divorced Spanish American. Didn’t take a feather out of her my handling
them. As if I was her clotheshorse. Saw her in the viceregal party when
Stubbs the park ranger got me in with Whelan of the _Express._
Scavenging what the quality left. High tea. Mayonnaise I poured on the
plums thinking it was custard. Her ears ought to have tingled for a few
weeks after. Want to be a bull for her. Born courtesan. No nursery work
for her, thanks.
Poor Mrs Purefoy! Methodist husband. Method in his madness. Saffron bun
and milk and soda lunch in the educational dairy. Y. M. C. A. Eating
with a stopwatch, thirtytwo chews to the minute. And still his
muttonchop whiskers grew. Supposed to be well connected. Theodore’s
cousin in Dublin Castle. One tony relative in every family. Hardy
annuals he presents her with. Saw him out at the Three Jolly Topers
marching along bareheaded and his eldest boy carrying one in a
marketnet. The squallers. Poor thing! Then having to give the breast
year after year all hours of the night. Selfish those t.t’s are. Dog in
the manger. Only one lump of sugar in my tea, if you please.
He stood at Fleet street crossing. Luncheon interval. A sixpenny at
Rowe’s? Must look up that ad in the national library. An eightpenny in
the Burton. Better. On my way.
He walked on past Bolton’s Westmoreland house. Tea. Tea. Tea. I forgot
to tap Tom Kernan.
Sss. Dth, dth, dth! Three days imagine groaning on a bed with a
vinegared handkerchief round her forehead, her belly swollen out. Phew!
Dreadful simply! Child’s head too big: forceps. Doubled up inside her
trying to butt its way out blindly, groping for the way out. Kill me
that would. Lucky Molly got over hers lightly. They ought to invent
something to stop that. Life with hard labour. Twilight sleep idea:
queen Victoria was given that. Nine she had. A good layer. Old woman
that lived in a shoe she had so many children. Suppose he was
consumptive. Time someone thought about it instead of gassing about the
what was it the pensive bosom of the silver effulgence. Flapdoodle to
feed fools on. They could easily have big establishments whole thing
quite painless out of all the taxes give every child born five quid at
compound interest up to twentyone five per cent is a hundred shillings
and five tiresome pounds multiply by twenty decimal system encourage
people to put by money save hundred and ten and a bit twentyone years
want to work it out on paper come to a tidy sum more than you think.
Not stillborn of course. They are not even registered. Trouble for
nothing.
Funny sight two of them together, their bellies out. Molly and Mrs
Moisel. Mothers’ meeting. Phthisis retires for the time being, then
returns. How flat they look all of a sudden after. Peaceful eyes.
Weight off their mind. Old Mrs Thornton was a jolly old soul. All my
babies, she said. The spoon of pap in her mouth before she fed them. O,
that’s nyumnyum. Got her hand crushed by old Tom Wall’s son. His first
bow to the public. Head like a prize pumpkin. Snuffy Dr Murren. People
knocking them up at all hours. For God’ sake, doctor. Wife in her
throes. Then keep them waiting months for their fee. To attendance on
your wife. No gratitude in people. Humane doctors, most of them.
Before the huge high door of the Irish house of parliament a flock of
pigeons flew. Their little frolic after meals. Who will we do it on? I
pick the fellow in black. Here goes. Here’s good luck. Must be
thrilling from the air. Apjohn, myself and Owen Goldberg up in the
trees near Goose green playing the monkeys. Mackerel they called me.
A squad of constables debouched from College street, marching in Indian
file. Goosestep. Foodheated faces, sweating helmets, patting their
truncheons. After their feed with a good load of fat soup under their
belts. Policeman’s lot is oft a happy one. They split up in groups and
scattered, saluting, towards their beats. Let out to graze. Best moment
to attack one in pudding time. A punch in his dinner. A squad of
others, marching irregularly, rounded Trinity railings making for the
station. Bound for their troughs. Prepare to receive cavalry. Prepare
to receive soup.
He crossed under Tommy Moore’s roguish finger. They did right to put
him up over a urinal: meeting of the waters. Ought to be places for
women. Running into cakeshops. Settle my hat straight. _There is not in
this wide world a vallee_. Great song of Julia Morkan’s. Kept her voice
up to the very last. Pupil of Michael Balfe’s, wasn’t she?
He gazed after the last broad tunic. Nasty customers to tackle. Jack
Power could a tale unfold: father a G man. If a fellow gave them
trouble being lagged they let him have it hot and heavy in the
bridewell. Can’t blame them after all with the job they have especially
the young hornies. That horsepoliceman the day Joe Chamberlain was
given his degree in Trinity he got a run for his money. My word he did!
His horse’s hoofs clattering after us down Abbey street. Lucky I had
the presence of mind to dive into Manning’s or I was souped. He did
come a wallop, by George. Must have cracked his skull on the
cobblestones. I oughtn’t to have got myself swept along with those
medicals. And the Trinity jibs in their mortarboards. Looking for
trouble. Still I got to know that young Dixon who dressed that sting
for me in the Mater and now he’s in Holles street where Mrs Purefoy.
Wheels within wheels. Police whistle in my ears still. All skedaddled.
Why he fixed on me. Give me in charge. Right here it began.
—Up the Boers!
—Three cheers for De Wet!
—We’ll hang Joe Chamberlain on a sourapple tree.
Silly billies: mob of young cubs yelling their guts out. Vinegar hill.
The Butter exchange band. Few years’ time half of them magistrates and
civil servants. War comes on: into the army helterskelter: same fellows
used to. Whether on the scaffold high.
Never know who you’re talking to. Corny Kelleher he has Harvey Duff in
his eye. Like that Peter or Denis or James Carey that blew the gaff on
the invincibles. Member of the corporation too. Egging raw youths on to
get in the know all the time drawing secret service pay from the
castle. Drop him like a hot potato. Why those plainclothes men are
always courting slaveys. Easily twig a man used to uniform.
Squarepushing up against a backdoor. Maul her a bit. Then the next
thing on the menu. And who is the gentleman does be visiting there? Was
the young master saying anything? Peeping Tom through the keyhole.
Decoy duck. Hotblooded young student fooling round her fat arms
ironing.
—Are those yours, Mary?
—I don’t wear such things... Stop or I’ll tell the missus on you. Out
half the night.
—There are great times coming, Mary. Wait till you see.
—Ah, gelong with your great times coming.
Barmaids too. Tobaccoshopgirls.
James Stephens’ idea was the best. He knew them. Circles of ten so that
a fellow couldn’t round on more than his own ring. Sinn Fein. Back out
you get the knife. Hidden hand. Stay in. The firing squad. Turnkey’s
daughter got him out of Richmond, off from Lusk. Putting up in the
Buckingham Palace hotel under their very noses. Garibaldi.
You must have a certain fascination: Parnell. Arthur Griffith is a
squareheaded fellow but he has no go in him for the mob. Or gas about
our lovely land. Gammon and spinach. Dublin Bakery Company’s tearoom.
Debating societies. That republicanism is the best form of government.
That the language question should take precedence of the economic
question. Have your daughters inveigling them to your house. Stuff them
up with meat and drink. Michaelmas goose. Here’s a good lump of thyme
seasoning under the apron for you. Have another quart of goosegrease
before it gets too cold. Halffed enthusiasts. Penny roll and a walk
with the band. No grace for the carver. The thought that the other chap
pays best sauce in the world. Make themselves thoroughly at home. Show
us over those apricots, meaning peaches. The not far distant day.
Homerule sun rising up in the northwest.
His smile faded as he walked, a heavy cloud hiding the sun slowly,
shadowing Trinity’s surly front. Trams passed one another, ingoing,
outgoing, clanging. Useless words. Things go on same, day after day:
squads of police marching out, back: trams in, out. Those two loonies
mooching about. Dignam carted off. Mina Purefoy swollen belly on a bed
groaning to have a child tugged out of her. One born every second
somewhere. Other dying every second. Since I fed the birds five
minutes. Three hundred kicked the bucket. Other three hundred born,
washing the blood off, all are washed in the blood of the lamb, bawling
maaaaaa.
Cityful passing away, other cityful coming, passing away too: other
coming on, passing on. Houses, lines of houses, streets, miles of
pavements, piledup bricks, stones. Changing hands. This owner, that.
Landlord never dies they say. Other steps into his shoes when he gets
his notice to quit. They buy the place up with gold and still they have
all the gold. Swindle in it somewhere. Piled up in cities, worn away
age after age. Pyramids in sand. Built on bread and onions. Slaves
Chinese wall. Babylon. Big stones left. Round towers. Rest rubble,
sprawling suburbs, jerrybuilt. Kerwan’s mushroom houses built of
breeze. Shelter, for the night.
No-one is anything.
This is the very worst hour of the day. Vitality. Dull, gloomy: hate
this hour. Feel as if I had been eaten and spewed.
Provost’s house. The reverend Dr Salmon: tinned salmon. Well tinned in
there. Like a mortuary chapel. Wouldn’t live in it if they paid me.
Hope they have liver and bacon today. Nature abhors a vacuum.
The sun freed itself slowly and lit glints of light among the
silverware opposite in Walter Sexton’s window by which John Howard
Parnell passed, unseeing.
There he is: the brother. Image of him. Haunting face. Now that’s a
coincidence. Course hundreds of times you think of a person and don’t
meet him. Like a man walking in his sleep. No-one knows him. Must be a
corporation meeting today. They say he never put on the city marshal’s
uniform since he got the job. Charley Kavanagh used to come out on his
high horse, cocked hat, puffed, powdered and shaved. Look at the
woebegone walk of him. Eaten a bad egg. Poached eyes on ghost. I have a
pain. Great man’s brother: his brother’s brother. He’d look nice on the
city charger. Drop into the D.B.C. probably for his coffee, play chess
there. His brother used men as pawns. Let them all go to pot. Afraid to
pass a remark on him. Freeze them up with that eye of his. That’s the
fascination: the name. All a bit touched. Mad Fanny and his other
sister Mrs Dickinson driving about with scarlet harness. Bolt upright
like surgeon M’Ardle. Still David Sheehy beat him for south Meath.
Apply for the Chiltern Hundreds and retire into public life. The
patriot’s banquet. Eating orangepeels in the park. Simon Dedalus said
when they put him in parliament that Parnell would come back from the
grave and lead him out of the house of commons by the arm.
—Of the twoheaded octopus, one of whose heads is the head upon which
the ends of the world have forgotten to come while the other speaks
with a Scotch accent. The tentacles...
They passed from behind Mr Bloom along the curbstone. Beard and
bicycle. Young woman.
And there he is too. Now that’s really a coincidence: second time.
Coming events cast their shadows before. With the approval of the
eminent poet, Mr Geo. Russell. That might be Lizzie Twigg with him. A.
E.: what does that mean? Initials perhaps. Albert Edward, Arthur
Edmund, Alphonsus Eb Ed El Esquire. What was he saying? The ends of the
world with a Scotch accent. Tentacles: octopus. Something occult:
symbolism. Holding forth. She’s taking it all in. Not saying a word. To
aid gentleman in literary work.
His eyes followed the high figure in homespun, beard and bicycle, a
listening woman at his side. Coming from the vegetarian. Only
weggebobbles and fruit. Don’t eat a beefsteak. If you do the eyes of
that cow will pursue you through all eternity. They say it’s healthier.
Windandwatery though. Tried it. Keep you on the run all day. Bad as a
bloater. Dreams all night. Why do they call that thing they gave me
nutsteak? Nutarians. Fruitarians. To give you the idea you are eating
rumpsteak. Absurd. Salty too. They cook in soda. Keep you sitting by
the tap all night.
Her stockings are loose over her ankles. I detest that: so tasteless.
Those literary etherial people they are all. Dreamy, cloudy,
symbolistic. Esthetes they are. I wouldn’t be surprised if it was that
kind of food you see produces the like waves of the brain the poetical.
For example one of those policemen sweating Irish stew into their
shirts you couldn’t squeeze a line of poetry out of him. Don’t know
what poetry is even. Must be in a certain mood.
     The dreamy cloudy gull
     Waves o’er the waters dull.
He crossed at Nassau street corner and stood before the window of
Yeates and Son, pricing the fieldglasses. Or will I drop into old
Harris’s and have a chat with young Sinclair? Wellmannered fellow.
Probably at his lunch. Must get those old glasses of mine set right.
Goerz lenses six guineas. Germans making their way everywhere. Sell on
easy terms to capture trade. Undercutting. Might chance on a pair in
the railway lost property office. Astonishing the things people leave
behind them in trains and cloakrooms. What do they be thinking about?
Women too. Incredible. Last year travelling to Ennis had to pick up
that farmer’s daughter’s bag and hand it to her at Limerick junction.
Unclaimed money too. There’s a little watch up there on the roof of the
bank to test those glasses by.
His lids came down on the lower rims of his irides. Can’t see it. If
you imagine it’s there you can almost see it. Can’t see it.
He faced about and, standing between the awnings, held out his right
hand at arm’s length towards the sun. Wanted to try that often. Yes:
completely. The tip of his little finger blotted out the sun’s disk.
Must be the focus where the rays cross. If I had black glasses.
Interesting. There was a lot of talk about those sunspots when we were
in Lombard street west. Looking up from the back garden. Terrific
explosions they are. There will be a total eclipse this year: autumn
some time.
Now that I come to think of it that ball falls at Greenwich time. It’s
the clock is worked by an electric wire from Dunsink. Must go out there
some first Saturday of the month. If I could get an introduction to
professor Joly or learn up something about his family. That would do
to: man always feels complimented. Flattery where least expected.
Nobleman proud to be descended from some king’s mistress. His
foremother. Lay it on with a trowel. Cap in hand goes through the land.
Not go in and blurt out what you know you’re not to: what’s parallax?
Show this gentleman the door.
Ah.
His hand fell to his side again.
Never know anything about it. Waste of time. Gasballs spinning about,
crossing each other, passing. Same old dingdong always. Gas: then
solid: then world: then cold: then dead shell drifting around, frozen
rock, like that pineapple rock. The moon. Must be a new moon out, she
said. I believe there is.
He went on by la maison Claire.
Wait. The full moon was the night we were Sunday fortnight exactly
there is a new moon. Walking down by the Tolka. Not bad for a Fairview
moon. She was humming. The young May moon she’s beaming, love. He other
side of her. Elbow, arm. He. Glowworm’s la-amp is gleaming, love.
Touch. Fingers. Asking. Answer. Yes.
Stop. Stop. If it was it was. Must.
Mr Bloom, quickbreathing, slowlier walking passed Adam court.
With a keep quiet relief his eyes took note this is the street here
middle of the day of Bob Doran’s bottle shoulders. On his annual bend,
M’Coy said. They drink in order to say or do something or _cherchez la
femme_. Up in the Coombe with chummies and streetwalkers and then the
rest of the year sober as a judge.
Yes. Thought so. Sloping into the Empire. Gone. Plain soda would do him
good. Where Pat Kinsella had his Harp theatre before Whitbred ran the
Queen’s. Broth of a boy. Dion Boucicault business with his harvestmoon
face in a poky bonnet. Three Purty Maids from School. How time flies,
eh? Showing long red pantaloons under his skirts. Drinkers, drinking,
laughed spluttering, their drink against their breath. More power, Pat.
Coarse red: fun for drunkards: guffaw and smoke. Take off that white
hat. His parboiled eyes. Where is he now? Beggar somewhere. The harp
that once did starve us all.
I was happier then. Or was that I? Or am I now I? Twentyeight I was.
She twentythree. When we left Lombard street west something changed.
Could never like it again after Rudy. Can’t bring back time. Like
holding water in your hand. Would you go back to then? Just beginning
then. Would you? Are you not happy in your home you poor little naughty
boy? Wants to sew on buttons for me. I must answer. Write it in the
library.
Grafton street gay with housed awnings lured his senses. Muslin prints,
silkdames and dowagers, jingle of harnesses, hoofthuds lowringing in
the baking causeway. Thick feet that woman has in the white stockings.
Hope the rain mucks them up on her. Countrybred chawbacon. All the beef
to the heels were in. Always gives a woman clumsy feet. Molly looks out
of plumb.
He passed, dallying, the windows of Brown Thomas, silk mercers.
Cascades of ribbons. Flimsy China silks. A tilted urn poured from its
mouth a flood of bloodhued poplin: lustrous blood. The huguenots
brought that here. _La causa è santa!_ Tara tara. Great chorus that.
Taree tara. Must be washed in rainwater. Meyerbeer. Tara: bom bom bom.
Pincushions. I’m a long time threatening to buy one. Sticking them all
over the place. Needles in window curtains.
He bared slightly his left forearm. Scrape: nearly gone. Not today
anyhow. Must go back for that lotion. For her birthday perhaps.
Junejulyaugseptember eighth. Nearly three months off. Then she mightn’t
like it. Women won’t pick up pins. Say it cuts lo.
Gleaming silks, petticoats on slim brass rails, rays of flat silk
stockings.
Useless to go back. Had to be. Tell me all.
High voices. Sunwarm silk. Jingling harnesses. All for a woman, home
and houses, silkwebs, silver, rich fruits spicy from Jaffa. Agendath
Netaim. Wealth of the world.
A warm human plumpness settled down on his brain. His brain yielded.
Perfume of embraces all him assailed. With hungered flesh obscurely, he
mutely craved to adore.
Duke street. Here we are. Must eat. The Burton. Feel better then.
He turned Combridge’s corner, still pursued. Jingling, hoofthuds.
Perfumed bodies, warm, full. All kissed, yielded: in deep summer
fields, tangled pressed grass, in trickling hallways of tenements,
along sofas, creaking beds.
—Jack, love!
—Darling!
—Kiss me, Reggy!
—My boy!
—Love!
His heart astir he pushed in the door of the Burton restaurant. Stink
gripped his trembling breath: pungent meatjuice, slush of greens. See
the animals feed.
Men, men, men.
Perched on high stools by the bar, hats shoved back, at the tables
calling for more bread no charge, swilling, wolfing gobfuls of sloppy
food, their eyes bulging, wiping wetted moustaches. A pallid suetfaced
young man polished his tumbler knife fork and spoon with his napkin.
New set of microbes. A man with an infant’s saucestained napkin tucked
round him shovelled gurgling soup down his gullet. A man spitting back
on his plate: halfmasticated gristle: gums: no teeth to chewchewchew
it. Chump chop from the grill. Bolting to get it over. Sad booser’s
eyes. Bitten off more than he can chew. Am I like that? See ourselves
as others see us. Hungry man is an angry man. Working tooth and jaw.
Don’t! O! A bone! That last pagan king of Ireland Cormac in the
schoolpoem choked himself at Sletty southward of the Boyne. Wonder what
he was eating. Something galoptious. Saint Patrick converted him to
Christianity. Couldn’t swallow it all however.
—Roast beef and cabbage.
—One stew.
Smells of men. Spat-on sawdust, sweetish warmish cigarettesmoke, reek
of plug, spilt beer, men’s beery piss, the stale of ferment.
His gorge rose.
Couldn’t eat a morsel here. Fellow sharpening knife and fork to eat all
before him, old chap picking his tootles. Slight spasm, full, chewing
the cud. Before and after. Grace after meals. Look on this picture then
on that. Scoffing up stewgravy with sopping sippets of bread. Lick it
off the plate, man! Get out of this.
He gazed round the stooled and tabled eaters, tightening the wings of
his nose.
—Two stouts here.
—One corned and cabbage.
That fellow ramming a knifeful of cabbage down as if his life depended
on it. Good stroke. Give me the fidgets to look. Safer to eat from his
three hands. Tear it limb from limb. Second nature to him. Born with a
silver knife in his mouth. That’s witty, I think. Or no. Silver means
born rich. Born with a knife. But then the allusion is lost.
An illgirt server gathered sticky clattering plates. Rock, the head
bailiff, standing at the bar blew the foamy crown from his tankard.
Well up: it splashed yellow near his boot. A diner, knife and fork
upright, elbows on table, ready for a second helping stared towards the
foodlift across his stained square of newspaper. Other chap telling him
something with his mouth full. Sympathetic listener. Table talk. I
munched hum un thu Unchster Bunk un Munchday. Ha? Did you, faith?
Mr Bloom raised two fingers doubtfully to his lips. His eyes said:
—Not here. Don’t see him.
Out. I hate dirty eaters.
He backed towards the door. Get a light snack in Davy Byrne’s. Stopgap.
Keep me going. Had a good breakfast.
—Roast and mashed here.
—Pint of stout.
Every fellow for his own, tooth and nail. Gulp. Grub. Gulp. Gobstuff.
He came out into clearer air and turned back towards Grafton street.
Eat or be eaten. Kill! Kill!
Suppose that communal kitchen years to come perhaps. All trotting down
with porringers and tommycans to be filled. Devour contents in the
street. John Howard Parnell example the provost of Trinity every
mother’s son don’t talk of your provosts and provost of Trinity women
and children cabmen priests parsons fieldmarshals archbishops. From
Ailesbury road, Clyde road, artisans’ dwellings, north Dublin union,
lord mayor in his gingerbread coach, old queen in a bathchair. My
plate’s empty. After you with our incorporated drinkingcup. Like sir
Philip Crampton’s fountain. Rub off the microbes with your
handkerchief. Next chap rubs on a new batch with his. Father O’Flynn
would make hares of them all. Have rows all the same. All for number
one. Children fighting for the scrapings of the pot. Want a souppot as
big as the Phoenix park. Harpooning flitches and hindquarters out of
it. Hate people all round you. City Arms hotel _table d’hôte_ she
called it. Soup, joint and sweet. Never know whose thoughts you’re
chewing. Then who’d wash up all the plates and forks? Might be all
feeding on tabloids that time. Teeth getting worse and worse.
After all there’s a lot in that vegetarian fine flavour of things from
the earth garlic of course it stinks after Italian organgrinders crisp
of onions mushrooms truffles. Pain to the animal too. Pluck and draw
fowl. Wretched brutes there at the cattlemarket waiting for the poleaxe
to split their skulls open. Moo. Poor trembling calves. Meh. Staggering
bob. Bubble and squeak. Butchers’ buckets wobbly lights. Give us that
brisket off the hook. Plup. Rawhead and bloody bones. Flayed glasseyed
sheep hung from their haunches, sheepsnouts bloodypapered snivelling
nosejam on sawdust. Top and lashers going out. Don’t maul them pieces,
young one.
Hot fresh blood they prescribe for decline. Blood always needed.
Insidious. Lick it up smokinghot, thick sugary. Famished ghosts.
Ah, I’m hungry.
He entered Davy Byrne’s. Moral pub. He doesn’t chat. Stands a drink now
and then. But in leapyear once in four. Cashed a cheque for me once.
What will I take now? He drew his watch. Let me see now. Shandygaff?
—Hello, Bloom, Nosey Flynn said from his nook.
—Hello, Flynn.
—How’s things?
—Tiptop... Let me see. I’ll take a glass of burgundy and... let me see.
Sardines on the shelves. Almost taste them by looking. Sandwich? Ham
and his descendants musterred and bred there. Potted meats. What is
home without Plumtree’s potted meat? Incomplete. What a stupid ad!
Under the obituary notices they stuck it. All up a plumtree. Dignam’s
potted meat. Cannibals would with lemon and rice. White missionary too
salty. Like pickled pork. Expect the chief consumes the parts of
honour. Ought to be tough from exercise. His wives in a row to watch
the effect. _There was a right royal old nigger. Who ate or something
the somethings of the reverend Mr MacTrigger_. With it an abode of
bliss. Lord knows what concoction. Cauls mouldy tripes windpipes faked
and minced up. Puzzle find the meat. Kosher. No meat and milk together.
Hygiene that was what they call now. Yom Kippur fast spring cleaning of
inside. Peace and war depend on some fellow’s digestion. Religions.
Christmas turkeys and geese. Slaughter of innocents. Eat drink and be
merry. Then casual wards full after. Heads bandaged. Cheese digests all
but itself. Mity cheese.
—Have you a cheese sandwich?
—Yes, sir.
Like a few olives too if they had them. Italian I prefer. Good glass of
burgundy take away that. Lubricate. A nice salad, cool as a cucumber,
Tom Kernan can dress. Puts gusto into it. Pure olive oil. Milly served
me that cutlet with a sprig of parsley. Take one Spanish onion. God
made food, the devil the cooks. Devilled crab.
—Wife well?
—Quite well, thanks... A cheese sandwich, then. Gorgonzola, have you?
—Yes, sir.
Nosey Flynn sipped his grog.
—Doing any singing those times?
Look at his mouth. Could whistle in his own ear. Flap ears to match.
Music. Knows as much about it as my coachman. Still better tell him.
Does no harm. Free ad.
—She’s engaged for a big tour end of this month. You may have heard
perhaps.
—No. O, that’s the style. Who’s getting it up?
The curate served.
—How much is that?
—Seven d., sir... Thank you, sir.
Mr Bloom cut his sandwich into slender strips. _Mr MacTrigger_. Easier
than the dreamy creamy stuff. _His five hundred wives. Had the time of
their lives._
—Mustard, sir?
—Thank you.
He studded under each lifted strip yellow blobs. _Their lives_. I have
it. _It grew bigger and bigger and bigger_.
—Getting it up? he said. Well, it’s like a company idea, you see. Part
shares and part profits.
—Ay, now I remember, Nosey Flynn said, putting his hand in his pocket
to scratch his groin. Who is this was telling me? Isn’t Blazes Boylan
mixed up in it?
A warm shock of air heat of mustard hanched on Mr Bloom’s heart. He
raised his eyes and met the stare of a bilious clock. Two. Pub clock
five minutes fast. Time going on. Hands moving. Two. Not yet.
His midriff yearned then upward, sank within him, yearned more longly,
longingly.
Wine.
He smellsipped the cordial juice and, bidding his throat strongly to
speed it, set his wineglass delicately down.
—Yes, he said. He’s the organiser in point of fact.
No fear: no brains.
Nosey Flynn snuffled and scratched. Flea having a good square meal.
—He had a good slice of luck, Jack Mooney was telling me, over that
boxingmatch Myler Keogh won again that soldier in the Portobello
barracks. By God, he had the little kipper down in the county Carlow he
was telling me...
Hope that dewdrop doesn’t come down into his glass. No, snuffled it up.
—For near a month, man, before it came off. Sucking duck eggs by God
till further orders. Keep him off the boose, see? O, by God, Blazes is
a hairy chap.
Davy Byrne came forward from the hindbar in tuckstitched shirtsleeves,
cleaning his lips with two wipes of his napkin. Herring’s blush. Whose
smile upon each feature plays with such and such replete. Too much fat
on the parsnips.
—And here’s himself and pepper on him, Nosey Flynn said. Can you give
us a good one for the Gold cup?
—I’m off that, Mr Flynn, Davy Byrne answered. I never put anything on a
horse.
—You’re right there, Nosey Flynn said.
Mr Bloom ate his strips of sandwich, fresh clean bread, with relish of
disgust pungent mustard, the feety savour of green cheese. Sips of his
wine soothed his palate. Not logwood that. Tastes fuller this weather
with the chill off.
Nice quiet bar. Nice piece of wood in that counter. Nicely planed. Like
the way it curves there.
—I wouldn’t do anything at all in that line, Davy Byrne said. It ruined
many a man, the same horses.
Vintners’ sweepstake. Licensed for the sale of beer, wine and spirits
for consumption on the premises. Heads I win tails you lose.
—True for you, Nosey Flynn said. Unless you’re in the know. There’s no
straight sport going now. Lenehan gets some good ones. He’s giving
Sceptre today. Zinfandel’s the favourite, Lord Howard de Walden’s, won
at Epsom. Morny Cannon is riding him. I could have got seven to one
against Saint Amant a fortnight before.
—That so? Davy Byrne said...
He went towards the window and, taking up the pettycash book, scanned
its pages.
—I could, faith, Nosey Flynn said, snuffling. That was a rare bit of
horseflesh. Saint Frusquin was her sire. She won in a thunderstorm,
Rothschild’s filly, with wadding in her ears. Blue jacket and yellow
cap. Bad luck to big Ben Dollard and his John O’Gaunt. He put me off
it. Ay.
He drank resignedly from his tumbler, running his fingers down the
flutes.
—Ay, he said, sighing.
Mr Bloom, champing, standing, looked upon his sigh. Nosey numbskull.
Will I tell him that horse Lenehan? He knows already. Better let him
forget. Go and lose more. Fool and his money. Dewdrop coming down
again. Cold nose he’d have kissing a woman. Still they might like.
Prickly beards they like. Dogs’ cold noses. Old Mrs Riordan with the
rumbling stomach’s Skye terrier in the City Arms hotel. Molly fondling
him in her lap. O, the big doggybowwowsywowsy!
Wine soaked and softened rolled pith of bread mustard a moment mawkish
cheese. Nice wine it is. Taste it better because I’m not thirsty. Bath
of course does that. Just a bite or two. Then about six o’clock I can.
Six. Six. Time will be gone then. She...
Mild fire of wine kindled his veins. I wanted that badly. Felt so off
colour. His eyes unhungrily saw shelves of tins: sardines, gaudy
lobsters’ claws. All the odd things people pick up for food. Out of
shells, periwinkles with a pin, off trees, snails out of the ground the
French eat, out of the sea with bait on a hook. Silly fish learn
nothing in a thousand years. If you didn’t know risky putting anything
into your mouth. Poisonous berries. Johnny Magories. Roundness you
think good. Gaudy colour warns you off. One fellow told another and so
on. Try it on the dog first. Led on by the smell or the look. Tempting
fruit. Ice cones. Cream. Instinct. Orangegroves for instance. Need
artificial irrigation. Bleibtreustrasse. Yes but what about oysters.
Unsightly like a clot of phlegm. Filthy shells. Devil to open them too.
Who found them out? Garbage, sewage they feed on. Fizz and Red bank
oysters. Effect on the sexual. Aphrodis. He was in the Red Bank this
morning. Was he oysters old fish at table perhaps he young flesh in bed
no June has no ar no oysters. But there are people like things high.
Tainted game. Jugged hare. First catch your hare. Chinese eating eggs
fifty years old, blue and green again. Dinner of thirty courses. Each
dish harmless might mix inside. Idea for a poison mystery. That
archduke Leopold was it no yes or was it Otto one of those Habsburgs?
Or who was it used to eat the scruff off his own head? Cheapest lunch
in town. Of course aristocrats, then the others copy to be in the
fashion. Milly too rock oil and flour. Raw pastry I like myself. Half
the catch of oysters they throw back in the sea to keep up the price.
Cheap no-one would buy. Caviare. Do the grand. Hock in green glasses.
Swell blowout. Lady this. Powdered bosom pearls. The _élite. Crème de
la crème_. They want special dishes to pretend they’re. Hermit with a
platter of pulse keep down the stings of the flesh. Know me come eat
with me. Royal sturgeon high sheriff, Coffey, the butcher, right to
venisons of the forest from his ex. Send him back the half of a cow.
Spread I saw down in the Master of the Rolls’ kitchen area. Whitehatted
_chef_ like a rabbi. Combustible duck. Curly cabbage _à la duchesse de
Parme_. Just as well to write it on the bill of fare so you can know
what you’ve eaten. Too many drugs spoil the broth. I know it myself.
Dosing it with Edwards’ desiccated soup. Geese stuffed silly for them.
Lobsters boiled alive. Do ptake some ptarmigan. Wouldn’t mind being a
waiter in a swell hotel. Tips, evening dress, halfnaked ladies. May I
tempt you to a little more filleted lemon sole, miss Dubedat? Yes, do
bedad. And she did bedad. Huguenot name I expect that. A miss Dubedat
lived in Killiney, I remember. _Du de la_ is French. Still it’s the
same fish perhaps old Micky Hanlon of Moore street ripped the guts out
of making money hand over fist finger in fishes’ gills can’t write his
name on a cheque think he was painting the landscape with his mouth
twisted. Moooikill A Aitcha Ha ignorant as a kish of brogues, worth
fifty thousand pounds.
Stuck on the pane two flies buzzed, stuck.
Glowing wine on his palate lingered swallowed. Crushing in the
winepress grapes of Burgundy. Sun’s heat it is. Seems to a secret touch
telling me memory. Touched his sense moistened remembered. Hidden under
wild ferns on Howth below us bay sleeping: sky. No sound. The sky. The
bay purple by the Lion’s head. Green by Drumleck. Yellowgreen towards
Sutton. Fields of undersea, the lines faint brown in grass, buried
cities. Pillowed on my coat she had her hair, earwigs in the heather
scrub my hand under her nape, you’ll toss me all. O wonder! Coolsoft
with ointments her hand touched me, caressed: her eyes upon me did not
turn away. Ravished over her I lay, full lips full open, kissed her
mouth. Yum. Softly she gave me in my mouth the seedcake warm and
chewed. Mawkish pulp her mouth had mumbled sweetsour of her spittle.
Joy: I ate it: joy. Young life, her lips that gave me pouting. Soft
warm sticky gumjelly lips. Flowers her eyes were, take me, willing
eyes. Pebbles fell. She lay still. A goat. No-one. High on Ben Howth
rhododendrons a nannygoat walking surefooted, dropping currants.
Screened under ferns she laughed warmfolded. Wildly I lay on her,
kissed her: eyes, her lips, her stretched neck beating, woman’s breasts
full in her blouse of nun’s veiling, fat nipples upright. Hot I tongued
her. She kissed me. I was kissed. All yielding she tossed my hair.
Kissed, she kissed me.
Me. And me now.
Stuck, the flies buzzed.
His downcast eyes followed the silent veining of the oaken slab.
Beauty: it curves: curves are beauty. Shapely goddesses, Venus, Juno:
curves the world admires. Can see them library museum standing in the
round hall, naked goddesses. Aids to digestion. They don’t care what
man looks. All to see. Never speaking. I mean to say to fellows like
Flynn. Suppose she did Pygmalion and Galatea what would she say first?
Mortal! Put you in your proper place. Quaffing nectar at mess with gods
golden dishes, all ambrosial. Not like a tanner lunch we have, boiled
mutton, carrots and turnips, bottle of Allsop. Nectar imagine it
drinking electricity: gods’ food. Lovely forms of women sculped
Junonian. Immortal lovely. And we stuffing food in one hole and out
behind: food, chyle, blood, dung, earth, food: have to feed it like
stoking an engine. They have no. Never looked. I’ll look today. Keeper
won’t see. Bend down let something fall see if she.
Dribbling a quiet message from his bladder came to go to do not to do
there to do. A man and ready he drained his glass to the lees and
walked, to men too they gave themselves, manly conscious, lay with men
lovers, a youth enjoyed her, to the yard.
When the sound of his boots had ceased Davy Byrne said from his book:
—What is this he is? Isn’t he in the insurance line?
—He’s out of that long ago, Nosey Flynn said. He does canvassing for
the _Freeman._
—I know him well to see, Davy Byrne said. Is he in trouble?
—Trouble? Nosey Flynn said. Not that I heard of. Why?
—I noticed he was in mourning.
—Was he? Nosey Flynn said. So he was, faith. I asked him how was all at
home. You’re right, by God. So he was.
—I never broach the subject, Davy Byrne said humanely, if I see a
gentleman is in trouble that way. It only brings it up fresh in their
minds.
—It’s not the wife anyhow, Nosey Flynn said. I met him the day before
yesterday and he coming out of that Irish farm dairy John Wyse Nolan’s
wife has in Henry street with a jar of cream in his hand taking it home
to his better half. She’s well nourished, I tell you. Plovers on toast.
—And is he doing for the _Freeman?_ Davy Byrne said.
Nosey Flynn pursed his lips.
—He doesn’t buy cream on the ads he picks up. You can make bacon of
that.
—How so? Davy Byrne asked, coming from his book.
Nosey Flynn made swift passes in the air with juggling fingers. He
winked.
—He’s in the craft, he said.
—Do you tell me so? Davy Byrne said.
—Very much so, Nosey Flynn said. Ancient free and accepted order. He’s
an excellent brother. Light, life and love, by God. They give him a leg
up. I was told that by a—well, I won’t say who.
—Is that a fact?
—O, it’s a fine order, Nosey Flynn said. They stick to you when you’re
down. I know a fellow was trying to get into it. But they’re as close
as damn it. By God they did right to keep the women out of it.
Davy Byrne smiledyawnednodded all in one:
—Iiiiiichaaaaaaach!
—There was one woman, Nosey Flynn said, hid herself in a clock to find
out what they do be doing. But be damned but they smelt her out and
swore her in on the spot a master mason. That was one of the saint
Legers of Doneraile.
Davy Byrne, sated after his yawn, said with tearwashed eyes:
—And is that a fact? Decent quiet man he is. I often saw him in here
and I never once saw him—you know, over the line.
—God Almighty couldn’t make him drunk, Nosey Flynn said firmly. Slips
off when the fun gets too hot. Didn’t you see him look at his watch?
Ah, you weren’t there. If you ask him to have a drink first thing he
does he outs with the watch to see what he ought to imbibe. Declare to
God he does.
—There are some like that, Davy Byrne said. He’s a safe man, I’d say.
—He’s not too bad, Nosey Flynn said, snuffling it up. He’s been known
to put his hand down too to help a fellow. Give the devil his due. O,
Bloom has his good points. But there’s one thing he’ll never do.
His hand scrawled a dry pen signature beside his grog.
—I know, Davy Byrne said.
—Nothing in black and white, Nosey Flynn said.
Paddy Leonard and Bantam Lyons came in. Tom Rochford followed frowning,
a plaining hand on his claret waistcoat.
—Day, Mr Byrne.
—Day, gentlemen.
They paused at the counter.
—Who’s standing? Paddy Leonard asked.
—I’m sitting anyhow, Nosey Flynn answered.
—Well, what’ll it be? Paddy Leonard asked.
—I’ll take a stone ginger, Bantam Lyons said.
—How much? Paddy Leonard cried. Since when, for God’ sake? What’s
yours, Tom?
—How is the main drainage? Nosey Flynn asked, sipping.
For answer Tom Rochford pressed his hand to his breastbone and
hiccupped.
—Would I trouble you for a glass of fresh water, Mr Byrne? he said.
—Certainly, sir.
Paddy Leonard eyed his alemates.
—Lord love a duck, he said. Look at what I’m standing drinks to! Cold
water and gingerpop! Two fellows that would suck whisky off a sore leg.
He has some bloody horse up his sleeve for the Gold cup. A dead snip.
—Zinfandel is it? Nosey Flynn asked.
Tom Rochford spilt powder from a twisted paper into the water set
before him.
—That cursed dyspepsia, he said before drinking.
—Breadsoda is very good, Davy Byrne said.
Tom Rochford nodded and drank.
—Is it Zinfandel?
—Say nothing! Bantam Lyons winked. I’m going to plunge five bob on my
own.
—Tell us if you’re worth your salt and be damned to you, Paddy Leonard
said. Who gave it to you?
Mr Bloom on his way out raised three fingers in greeting.
—So long! Nosey Flynn said.
The others turned.
—That’s the man now that gave it to me, Bantam Lyons whispered.
—Prrwht! Paddy Leonard said with scorn. Mr Byrne, sir, we’ll take two
of your small Jamesons after that and a...
—Stone ginger, Davy Byrne added civilly.
—Ay, Paddy Leonard said. A suckingbottle for the baby.
Mr Bloom walked towards Dawson street, his tongue brushing his teeth
smooth. Something green it would have to be: spinach, say. Then with
those Röntgen rays searchlight you could.
At Duke lane a ravenous terrier choked up a sick knuckly cud on the
cobblestones and lapped it with new zest. Surfeit. Returned with thanks
having fully digested the contents. First sweet then savoury. Mr Bloom
coasted warily. Ruminants. His second course. Their upper jaw they
move. Wonder if Tom Rochford will do anything with that invention of
his? Wasting time explaining it to Flynn’s mouth. Lean people long
mouths. Ought to be a hall or a place where inventors could go in and
invent free. Course then you’d have all the cranks pestering.
He hummed, prolonging in solemn echo the closes of the bars:
     Don Giovanni, a cenar teco
     M’invitasti.
Feel better. Burgundy. Good pick me up. Who distilled first? Some chap
in the blues. Dutch courage. That _Kilkenny People_ in the national
library now I must.
Bare clean closestools waiting in the window of William Miller,
plumber, turned back his thoughts. They could: and watch it all the way
down, swallow a pin sometimes come out of the ribs years after, tour
round the body changing biliary duct spleen squirting liver gastric
juice coils of intestines like pipes. But the poor buffer would have to
stand all the time with his insides entrails on show. Science.
—_A cenar teco._
What does that _teco_ mean? Tonight perhaps.
     Don Giovanni, thou hast me invited
     To come to supper tonight,
     The rum the rumdum.
Doesn’t go properly.
Keyes: two months if I get Nannetti to. That’ll be two pounds ten about
two pounds eight. Three Hynes owes me. Two eleven. Prescott’s dyeworks
van over there. If I get Billy Prescott’s ad: two fifteen. Five guineas
about. On the pig’s back.
Could buy one of those silk petticoats for Molly, colour of her new
garters.
Today. Today. Not think.
Tour the south then. What about English wateringplaces? Brighton,
Margate. Piers by moonlight. Her voice floating out. Those lovely
seaside girls. Against John Long’s a drowsing loafer lounged in heavy
thought, gnawing a crusted knuckle. Handy man wants job. Small wages.
Will eat anything.
Mr Bloom turned at Gray’s confectioner’s window of unbought tarts and
passed the reverend Thomas Connellan’s bookstore. _Why I left the
church of Rome? Birds’ Nest._ Women run him. They say they used to give
pauper children soup to change to protestants in the time of the potato
blight. Society over the way papa went to for the conversion of poor
jews. Same bait. Why we left the church of Rome.
A blind stripling stood tapping the curbstone with his slender cane. No
tram in sight. Wants to cross.
—Do you want to cross? Mr Bloom asked.
The blind stripling did not answer. His wallface frowned weakly. He
moved his head uncertainly.
—You’re in Dawson street, Mr Bloom said. Molesworth street is opposite.
Do you want to cross? There’s nothing in the way.
The cane moved out trembling to the left. Mr Bloom’s eye followed its
line and saw again the dyeworks’ van drawn up before Drago’s. Where I
saw his brillantined hair just when I was. Horse drooping. Driver in
John Long’s. Slaking his drouth.
—There’s a van there, Mr Bloom said, but it’s not moving. I’ll see you
across. Do you want to go to Molesworth street?
—Yes, the stripling answered. South Frederick street.
—Come, Mr Bloom said.
He touched the thin elbow gently: then took the limp seeing hand to
guide it forward.
Say something to him. Better not do the condescending. They mistrust
what you tell them. Pass a common remark.
—The rain kept off.
No answer.
Stains on his coat. Slobbers his food, I suppose. Tastes all different
for him. Have to be spoonfed first. Like a child’s hand, his hand. Like
Milly’s was. Sensitive. Sizing me up I daresay from my hand. Wonder if
he has a name. Van. Keep his cane clear of the horse’s legs: tired
drudge get his doze. That’s right. Clear. Behind a bull: in front of a
horse.
—Thanks, sir.
Knows I’m a man. Voice.
—Right now? First turn to the left.
The blind stripling tapped the curbstone and went on his way, drawing
his cane back, feeling again.
Mr Bloom walked behind the eyeless feet, a flatcut suit of herringbone
tweed. Poor young fellow! How on earth did he know that van was there?
Must have felt it. See things in their forehead perhaps: kind of sense
of volume. Weight or size of it, something blacker than the dark.
Wonder would he feel it if something was removed. Feel a gap. Queer
idea of Dublin he must have, tapping his way round by the stones. Could
he walk in a beeline if he hadn’t that cane? Bloodless pious face like
a fellow going in to be a priest.
Penrose! That was that chap’s name.
Look at all the things they can learn to do. Read with their fingers.
Tune pianos. Or we are surprised they have any brains. Why we think a
deformed person or a hunchback clever if he says something we might
say. Of course the other senses are more. Embroider. Plait baskets.
People ought to help. Workbasket I could buy for Molly’s birthday.
Hates sewing. Might take an objection. Dark men they call them.
Sense of smell must be stronger too. Smells on all sides, bunched
together. Each street different smell. Each person too. Then the
spring, the summer: smells. Tastes? They say you can’t taste wines with
your eyes shut or a cold in the head. Also smoke in the dark they say
get no pleasure.
And with a woman, for instance. More shameless not seeing. That girl
passing the Stewart institution, head in the air. Look at me. I have
them all on. Must be strange not to see her. Kind of a form in his
mind’s eye. The voice, temperatures: when he touches her with his
fingers must almost see the lines, the curves. His hands on her hair,
for instance. Say it was black, for instance. Good. We call it black.
Then passing over her white skin. Different feel perhaps. Feeling of
white.
Postoffice. Must answer. Fag today. Send her a postal order two
shillings, half a crown. Accept my little present. Stationer’s just
here too. Wait. Think over it.
With a gentle finger he felt ever so slowly the hair combed back above
his ears. Again. Fibres of fine fine straw. Then gently his finger felt
the skin of his right cheek. Downy hair there too. Not smooth enough.
The belly is the smoothest. No-one about. There he goes into Frederick
street. Perhaps to Levenston’s dancing academy piano. Might be settling
my braces.
Walking by Doran’s publichouse he slid his hand between his waistcoat
and trousers and, pulling aside his shirt gently, felt a slack fold of
his belly. But I know it’s whitey yellow. Want to try in the dark to
see.
He withdrew his hand and pulled his dress to.
Poor fellow! Quite a boy. Terrible. Really terrible. What dreams would
he have, not seeing? Life a dream for him. Where is the justice being
born that way? All those women and children excursion beanfeast burned
and drowned in New York. Holocaust. Karma they call that transmigration
for sins you did in a past life the reincarnation met him pike hoses.
Dear, dear, dear. Pity, of course: but somehow you can’t cotton on to
them someway.
Sir Frederick Falkiner going into the freemasons’ hall. Solemn as Troy.
After his good lunch in Earlsfort terrace. Old legal cronies cracking a
magnum. Tales of the bench and assizes and annals of the bluecoat
school. I sentenced him to ten years. I suppose he’d turn up his nose
at that stuff I drank. Vintage wine for them, the year marked on a
dusty bottle. Has his own ideas of justice in the recorder’s court.
Wellmeaning old man. Police chargesheets crammed with cases get their
percentage manufacturing crime. Sends them to the rightabout. The devil
on moneylenders. Gave Reuben J a great strawcalling. Now he’s really
what they call a dirty jew. Power those judges have. Crusty old topers
in wigs. Bear with a sore paw. And may the Lord have mercy on your
soul.
Hello, placard. Mirus bazaar. His Excellency the lord lieutenant.
Sixteenth. Today it is. In aid of funds for Mercer’s hospital. _The
Messiah_ was first given for that. Yes. Handel. What about going out
there: Ballsbridge. Drop in on Keyes. No use sticking to him like a
leech. Wear out my welcome. Sure to know someone on the gate.
Mr Bloom came to Kildare street. First I must. Library.
Straw hat in sunlight. Tan shoes. Turnedup trousers. It is. It is.
His heart quopped softly. To the right. Museum. Goddesses. He swerved
to the right.
Is it? Almost certain. Won’t look. Wine in my face. Why did I? Too
heady. Yes, it is. The walk. Not see. Get on.
Making for the museum gate with long windy steps he lifted his eyes.
Handsome building. Sir Thomas Deane designed. Not following me?
Didn’t see me perhaps. Light in his eyes.
The flutter of his breath came forth in short sighs. Quick. Cold
statues: quiet there. Safe in a minute.
No. Didn’t see me. After two. Just at the gate.
My heart!
His eyes beating looked steadfastly at cream curves of stone. Sir
Thomas Deane was the Greek architecture.
Look for something I.
His hasty hand went quick into a pocket, took out, read unfolded
Agendath Netaim. Where did I?
Busy looking.
He thrust back quick Agendath.
Afternoon she said.
I am looking for that. Yes, that. Try all pockets. Handker. _Freeman._
Where did I? Ah, yes. Trousers. Potato. Purse. Where?
Hurry. Walk quietly. Moment more. My heart.
His hand looking for the where did I put found in his hip pocket soap
lotion have to call tepid paper stuck. Ah soap there I yes. Gate.
Safe!
[ 9 ]
Urbane, to comfort them, the quaker librarian purred:
—And we have, have we not, those priceless pages of _Wilhelm Meister_.
A great poet on a great brother poet. A hesitating soul taking arms
against a sea of troubles, torn by conflicting doubts, as one sees in
real life.
He came a step a sinkapace forward on neatsleather creaking and a step
backward a sinkapace on the solemn floor.
A noiseless attendant setting open the door but slightly made him a
noiseless beck.
—Directly, said he, creaking to go, albeit lingering. The beautiful
ineffectual dreamer who comes to grief against hard facts. One always
feels that Goethe’s judgments are so true. True in the larger analysis.
Twicreakingly analysis he corantoed off. Bald, most zealous by the door
he gave his large ear all to the attendant’s words: heard them: and was
gone.
Two left.
—Monsieur de la Palice, Stephen sneered, was alive fifteen minutes
before his death.
—Have you found those six brave medicals, John Eglinton asked with
elder’s gall, to write _Paradise Lost_ at your dictation? _The Sorrows
of Satan_ he calls it.
Smile. Smile Cranly’s smile.
     First he tickled her
     Then he patted her
     Then he passed the female catheter
     For he was a medical
     Jolly old medi...
—I feel you would need one more for _Hamlet._ Seven is dear to the
mystic mind. The shining seven W.B. calls them.
Glittereyed his rufous skull close to his greencapped desklamp sought
the face bearded amid darkgreener shadow, an ollav, holyeyed. He
laughed low: a sizar’s laugh of Trinity: unanswered.
     Orchestral Satan, weeping many a rood
     Tears such as angels weep.
     Ed egli avea del cul fatto trombetta.
He holds my follies hostage.
Cranly’s eleven true Wicklowmen to free their sireland. Gaptoothed
Kathleen, her four beautiful green fields, the stranger in her house.
And one more to hail him: _ave, rabbi_: the Tinahely twelve. In the
shadow of the glen he cooees for them. My soul’s youth I gave him,
night by night. God speed. Good hunting.
Mulligan has my telegram.
Folly. Persist.
—Our young Irish bards, John Eglinton censured, have yet to create a
figure which the world will set beside Saxon Shakespeare’s Hamlet
though I admire him, as old Ben did, on this side idolatry.
—All these questions are purely academic, Russell oracled out of his
shadow. I mean, whether Hamlet is Shakespeare or James I or Essex.
Clergymen’s discussions of the historicity of Jesus. Art has to reveal
to us ideas, formless spiritual essences. The supreme question about a
work of art is out of how deep a life does it spring. The painting of
Gustave Moreau is the painting of ideas. The deepest poetry of Shelley,
the words of Hamlet bring our minds into contact with the eternal
wisdom, Plato’s world of ideas. All the rest is the speculation of
schoolboys for schoolboys.
A. E. has been telling some yankee interviewer. Wall, tarnation strike
me!
—The schoolmen were schoolboys first, Stephen said superpolitely.
Aristotle was once Plato’s schoolboy.
—And has remained so, one should hope, John Eglinton sedately said. One
can see him, a model schoolboy with his diploma under his arm.
He laughed again at the now smiling bearded face.
Formless spiritual. Father, Word and Holy Breath. Allfather, the
heavenly man. Hiesos Kristos, magician of the beautiful, the Logos who
suffers in us at every moment. This verily is that. I am the fire upon
the altar. I am the sacrificial butter.
Dunlop, Judge, the noblest Roman of them all, A.E., Arval, the Name
Ineffable, in heaven hight: K.H., their master, whose identity is no
secret to adepts. Brothers of the great white lodge always watching to
see if they can help. The Christ with the bridesister, moisture of
light, born of an ensouled virgin, repentant sophia, departed to the
plane of buddhi. The life esoteric is not for ordinary person. O.P.
must work off bad karma first. Mrs Cooper Oakley once glimpsed our very
illustrious sister H.P.B.’s elemental.
O, fie! Out on’t! _Pfuiteufel!_ You naughtn’t to look, missus, so you
naughtn’t when a lady’s ashowing of her elemental.
Mr Best entered, tall, young, mild, light. He bore in his hand with
grace a notebook, new, large, clean, bright.
—That model schoolboy, Stephen said, would find Hamlet’s musings about
the afterlife of his princely soul, the improbable, insignificant and
undramatic monologue, as shallow as Plato’s.
John Eglinton, frowning, said, waxing wroth:
—Upon my word it makes my blood boil to hear anyone compare Aristotle
with Plato.
—Which of the two, Stephen asked, would have banished me from his
commonwealth?
Unsheathe your dagger definitions. Horseness is the whatness of
allhorse. Streams of tendency and eons they worship. God: noise in the
street: very peripatetic. Space: what you damn well have to see.
Through spaces smaller than red globules of man’s blood they
creepycrawl after Blake’s buttocks into eternity of which this
vegetable world is but a shadow. Hold to the now, the here, through
which all future plunges to the past.
Mr Best came forward, amiable, towards his colleague.
—Haines is gone, he said.
—Is he?
—I was showing him Jubainville’s book. He’s quite enthusiastic, don’t
you know, about Hyde’s _Lovesongs of Connacht._ I couldn’t bring him in
to hear the discussion. He’s gone to Gill’s to buy it.
     Bound thee forth, my booklet, quick
     To greet the callous public.
     Writ, I ween, ’twas not my wish
     In lean unlovely English.
—The peatsmoke is going to his head, John Eglinton opined.
We feel in England. Penitent thief. Gone. I smoked his baccy. Green
twinkling stone. An emerald set in the ring of the sea.
—People do not know how dangerous lovesongs can be, the auric egg of
Russell warned occultly. The movements which work revolutions in the
world are born out of the dreams and visions in a peasant’s heart on
the hillside. For them the earth is not an exploitable ground but the
living mother. The rarefied air of the academy and the arena produce
the sixshilling novel, the musichall song. France produces the finest
flower of corruption in Mallarmé but the desirable life is revealed
only to the poor of heart, the life of Homer’s Phæacians.
From these words Mr Best turned an unoffending face to Stephen.
—Mallarmé, don’t you know, he said, has written those wonderful prose
poems Stephen MacKenna used to read to me in Paris. The one about
_Hamlet._ He says: _il se promène, lisant au livre de lui-même_, don’t
you know, _reading the book of himself_. He describes _Hamlet_ given in
a French town, don’t you know, a provincial town. They advertised it.
His free hand graciously wrote tiny signs in air.
_Hamlet
ou
Le Distrait
Pièce de Shakespeare_
He repeated to John Eglinton’s newgathered frown:
—_Pièce de Shakespeare_, don’t you know. It’s so French. The French
point of view. _Hamlet ou_...
—The absentminded beggar, Stephen ended.
John Eglinton laughed.
—Yes, I suppose it would be, he said. Excellent people, no doubt, but
distressingly shortsighted in some matters.
Sumptuous and stagnant exaggeration of murder.
—A deathsman of the soul Robert Greene called him, Stephen said. Not
for nothing was he a butcher’s son, wielding the sledded poleaxe and
spitting in his palms. Nine lives are taken off for his father’s one.
Our Father who art in purgatory. Khaki Hamlets don’t hesitate to shoot.
The bloodboltered shambles in act five is a forecast of the
concentration camp sung by Mr Swinburne.
Cranly, I his mute orderly, following battles from afar.
     Whelps and dams of murderous foes whom none
     But we had spared...
Between the Saxon smile and yankee yawp. The devil and the deep sea.
—He will have it that _Hamlet_ is a ghoststory, John Eglinton said for
Mr Best’s behoof. Like the fat boy in Pickwick he wants to make our
flesh creep.
     List! List! O List!
My flesh hears him: creeping, hears.
     If thou didst ever...
—What is a ghost? Stephen said with tingling energy. One who has faded
into impalpability through death, through absence, through change of
manners. Elizabethan London lay as far from Stratford as corrupt Paris
lies from virgin Dublin. Who is the ghost from _limbo patrum_,
returning to the world that has forgotten him? Who is King Hamlet?
John Eglinton shifted his spare body, leaning back to judge.
Lifted.
—It is this hour of a day in mid June, Stephen said, begging with a
swift glance their hearing. The flag is up on the playhouse by the
bankside. The bear Sackerson growls in the pit near it, Paris garden.
Canvasclimbers who sailed with Drake chew their sausages among the
groundlings.
Local colour. Work in all you know. Make them accomplices.
—Shakespeare has left the huguenot’s house in Silver street and walks
by the swanmews along the riverbank. But he does not stay to feed the
pen chivying her game of cygnets towards the rushes. The swan of Avon
has other thoughts.
Composition of place. Ignatius Loyola, make haste to help me!
—The play begins. A player comes on under the shadow, made up in the
castoff mail of a court buck, a wellset man with a bass voice. It is
the ghost, the king, a king and no king, and the player is Shakespeare
who has studied _Hamlet_ all the years of his life which were not
vanity in order to play the part of the spectre. He speaks the words to
Burbage, the young player who stands before him beyond the rack of
cerecloth, calling him by a name:
     Hamlet, I am thy father’s spirit,
bidding him list. To a son he speaks, the son of his soul, the prince,
young Hamlet and to the son of his body, Hamnet Shakespeare, who has
died in Stratford that his namesake may live for ever.
Is it possible that that player Shakespeare, a ghost by absence, and in
the vesture of buried Denmark, a ghost by death, speaking his own words
to his own son’s name (had Hamnet Shakespeare lived he would have been
prince Hamlet’s twin), is it possible, I want to know, or probable that
he did not draw or foresee the logical conclusion of those premises:
you are the dispossessed son: I am the murdered father: your mother is
the guilty queen, Ann Shakespeare, born Hathaway?
—But this prying into the family life of a great man, Russell began
impatiently.
Art thou there, truepenny?
—Interesting only to the parish clerk. I mean, we have the plays. I
mean when we read the poetry of _King Lear_ what is it to us how the
poet lived? As for living our servants can do that for us, Villiers de
l’Isle has said. Peeping and prying into greenroom gossip of the day,
the poet’s drinking, the poet’s debts. We have _King Lear_: and it is
immortal.
Mr Best’s face, appealed to, agreed.
     Flow over them with your waves and with your waters,
     Mananaan, Mananaan MacLir...
How now, sirrah, that pound he lent you when you were hungry?
Marry, I wanted it.
Take thou this noble.
Go to! You spent most of it in Georgina Johnson’s bed, clergyman’s
daughter. Agenbite of inwit.
Do you intend to pay it back?
O, yes.
When? Now?
Well... No.
When, then?
I paid my way. I paid my way.
Steady on. He’s from beyant Boyne water. The northeast corner. You owe
it.
Wait. Five months. Molecules all change. I am other I now. Other I got
pound.
Buzz. Buzz.
—I was just round at the courthouse, says he, looking for you. I hope
I’m not...
—No, says Martin, we’re ready.
Courthouse my eye and your pockets hanging down with gold and silver.
Mean bloody scut. Stand us a drink itself. Devil a sweet fear! There’s
a jew for you! All for number one. Cute as a shithouse rat. Hundred to
five.
—Don’t tell anyone, says the citizen.
—Beg your pardon, says he.
—Come on boys, says Martin, seeing it was looking blue. Come along now.
—Don’t tell anyone, says the citizen, letting a bawl out of him. It’s a
secret.
And the bloody dog woke up and let a growl.
—Bye bye all, says Martin.
And he got them out as quick as he could, Jack Power and Crofton or
whatever you call him and him in the middle of them letting on to be
all at sea and up with them on the bloody jaunting car.
—Off with you, says Martin to the jarvey.
The milkwhite dolphin tossed his mane and, rising in the golden poop
the helmsman spread the bellying sail upon the wind and stood off
forward with all sail set, the spinnaker to larboard. A many comely
nymphs drew nigh to starboard and to larboard and, clinging to the
sides of the noble bark, they linked their shining forms as doth the
cunning wheelwright when he fashions about the heart of his wheel the
equidistant rays whereof each one is sister to another and he binds
them all with an outer ring and giveth speed to the feet of men whenas
they ride to a hosting or contend for the smile of ladies fair. Even so
did they come and set them, those willing nymphs, the undying sisters.
And they laughed, sporting in a circle of their foam: and the bark
clave the waves.
But begob I was just lowering the heel of the pint when I saw the
citizen getting up to waddle to the door, puffing and blowing with the
dropsy, and he cursing the curse of Cromwell on him, bell, book and
candle in Irish, spitting and spatting out of him and Joe and little
Alf round him like a leprechaun trying to peacify him.
—Let me alone, says he.
And begob he got as far as the door and they holding him and he bawls
out of him:
—Three cheers for Israel!
Arrah, sit down on the parliamentary side of your arse for Christ’ sake
and don’t be making a public exhibition of yourself. Jesus, there’s
always some bloody clown or other kicking up a bloody murder about
bloody nothing. Gob, it’d turn the porter sour in your guts, so it
would.
And all the ragamuffins and sluts of the nation round the door and
Martin telling the jarvey to drive ahead and the citizen bawling and
Alf and Joe at him to whisht and he on his high horse about the jews
and the loafers calling for a speech and Jack Power trying to get him
to sit down on the car and hold his bloody jaw and a loafer with a
patch over his eye starts singing _If the man in the moon was a jew,
jew, jew_ and a slut shouts out of her:
—Eh, mister! Your fly is open, mister!
And says he:
—Mendelssohn was a jew and Karl Marx and Mercadante and Spinoza. And
the Saviour was a jew and his father was a jew. Your God.
—He had no father, says Martin. That’ll do now. Drive ahead.
—Whose God? says the citizen.
—Well, his uncle was a jew, says he. Your God was a jew. Christ was a
jew like me.
Gob, the citizen made a plunge back into the shop.
—By Jesus, says he, I’ll brain that bloody jewman for using the holy
name.
By Jesus, I’ll crucify him so I will. Give us that biscuitbox here.
—Stop! Stop! says Joe.
A large and appreciative gathering of friends and acquaintances from
the metropolis and greater Dublin assembled in their thousands to bid
farewell to Nagyaságos uram Lipóti Virag, late of Messrs Alexander
Thom’s, printers to His Majesty, on the occasion of his departure for
the distant clime of Százharminczbrojúgulyás-Dugulás (Meadow of
Murmuring Waters). The ceremony which went off with great _éclat_ was
characterised by the most affecting cordiality. An illuminated scroll
of ancient Irish vellum, the work of Irish artists, was presented to
the distinguished phenomenologist on behalf of a large section of the
community and was accompanied by the gift of a silver casket,
tastefully executed in the style of ancient Celtic ornament, a work
which reflects every credit on the makers, Messrs Jacob _agus_ Jacob.
The departing guest was the recipient of a hearty ovation, many of
those who were present being visibly moved when the select orchestra of
Irish pipes struck up the wellknown strains of _Come Back to Erin_,
followed immediately by _Rakóczsy’s March_. Tarbarrels and bonfires
were lighted along the coastline of the four seas on the summits of the
Hill of Howth, Three Rock Mountain, Sugarloaf, Bray Head, the mountains
of Mourne, the Galtees, the Ox and Donegal and Sperrin peaks, the
Nagles and the Bograghs, the Connemara hills, the reeks of
M’Gillicuddy, Slieve Aughty, Slieve Bernagh and Slieve Bloom. Amid
cheers that rent the welkin, responded to by answering cheers from a
big muster of henchmen on the distant Cambrian and Caledonian hills,
the mastodontic pleasureship slowly moved away saluted by a final
floral tribute from the representatives of the fair sex who were
present in large numbers while, as it proceeded down the river,
escorted by a flotilla of barges, the flags of the Ballast office and
Custom House were dipped in salute as were also those of the electrical
power station at the Pigeonhouse and the Poolbeg Light.
_Visszontlátásra, kedvés barátom! Visszontlátásra!_ Gone but not
forgotten.
Gob, the devil wouldn’t stop him till he got hold of the bloody tin
anyhow and out with him and little Alf hanging on to his elbow and he
shouting like a stuck pig, as good as any bloody play in the Queen’s
royal theatre:
—Where is he till I murder him?
And Ned and J. J. paralysed with the laughing.
—Bloody wars, says I, I’ll be in for the last gospel.
But as luck would have it the jarvey got the nag’s head round the other
way and off with him.
—Hold on, citizen, says Joe. Stop!
Begob he drew his hand and made a swipe and let fly. Mercy of God the
sun was in his eyes or he’d have left him for dead. Gob, he near sent
it into the county Longford. The bloody nag took fright and the old
mongrel after the car like bloody hell and all the populace shouting
and laughing and the old tinbox clattering along the street.
The catastrophe was terrific and instantaneous in its effect. The
observatory of Dunsink registered in all eleven shocks, all of the
fifth grade of Mercalli’s scale, and there is no record extant of a
similar seismic disturbance in our island since the earthquake of 1534,
the year of the rebellion of Silken Thomas. The epicentre appears to
have been that part of the metropolis which constitutes the Inn’s Quay
ward and parish of Saint Michan covering a surface of fortyone acres,
two roods and one square pole or perch. All the lordly residences in
the vicinity of the palace of justice were demolished and that noble
edifice itself, in which at the time of the catastrophe important legal
debates were in progress, is literally a mass of ruins beneath which it
is to be feared all the occupants have been buried alive. From the
reports of eyewitnesses it transpires that the seismic waves were
accompanied by a violent atmospheric perturbation of cyclonic
character. An article of headgear since ascertained to belong to the
much respected clerk of the crown and peace Mr George Fottrell and a
silk umbrella with gold handle with the engraved initials, crest, coat
of arms and house number of the erudite and worshipful chairman of
quarter sessions sir Frederick Falkiner, recorder of Dublin, have been
discovered by search parties in remote parts of the island
respectively, the former on the third basaltic ridge of the giant’s
causeway, the latter embedded to the extent of one foot three inches in
the sandy beach of Holeopen bay near the old head of Kinsale. Other
eyewitnesses depose that they observed an incandescent object of
enormous proportions hurtling through the atmosphere at a terrifying
velocity in a trajectory directed southwest by west. Messages of
condolence and sympathy are being hourly received from all parts of the
different continents and the sovereign pontiff has been graciously
pleased to decree that a special _missa pro defunctis_ shall be
celebrated simultaneously by the ordinaries of each and every cathedral
church of all the episcopal dioceses subject to the spiritual authority
of the Holy See in suffrage of the souls of those faithful departed who
have been so unexpectedly called away from our midst. The work of
salvage, removal of _débris,_ human remains etc has been entrusted to
Messrs Michael Meade and Son, 159 Great Brunswick street, and Messrs T.
and C. Martin, 77, 78, 79 and 80 North Wall, assisted by the men and
officers of the Duke of Cornwall’s light infantry under the general
supervision of H. R. H., rear admiral, the right honourable sir
Hercules Hannibal Habeas Corpus Anderson, K. G., K. P., K. T., P. C.,
K. C. B., M. P., J. P., M. B., D. S. O., S. O. D., M. F. H., M. R. I.
A., B. L., Mus. Doc., P. L. G., F. T. C. D., F. R. U. I., F. R. C. P.
I. and F. R. C. S. I.
You never saw the like of it in all your born puff. Gob, if he got that
lottery ticket on the side of his poll he’d remember the gold cup, he
would so, but begob the citizen would have been lagged for assault and
battery and Joe for aiding and abetting. The jarvey saved his life by
furious driving as sure as God made Moses. What? O, Jesus, he did. And
he let a volley of oaths after him.
—Did I kill him, says he, or what?
And he shouting to the bloody dog:
—After him, Garry! After him, boy!
And the last we saw was the bloody car rounding the corner and old
sheepsface on it gesticulating and the bloody mongrel after it with his
lugs back for all he was bloody well worth to tear him limb from limb.
Hundred to five! Jesus, he took the value of it out of him, I promise
you.
When, lo, there came about them all a great brightness and they beheld
the chariot wherein He stood ascend to heaven. And they beheld Him in
the chariot, clothed upon in the glory of the brightness, having
raiment as of the sun, fair as the moon and terrible that for awe they
durst not look upon Him. And there came a voice out of heaven, calling:
_Elijah! Elijah!_ And He answered with a main cry: _Abba! Adonai!_ And
they beheld Him even Him, ben Bloom Elijah, amid clouds of angels
ascend to the glory of the brightness at an angle of fortyfive degrees
over Donohoe’s in Little Green street like a shot off a shovel.
[ 13 ]
The summer evening had begun to fold the world in its mysterious
embrace. Far away in the west the sun was setting and the last glow of
all too fleeting day lingered lovingly on sea and strand, on the proud
promontory of dear old Howth guarding as ever the waters of the bay, on
the weedgrown rocks along Sandymount shore and, last but not least, on
the quiet church whence there streamed forth at times upon the
stillness the voice of prayer to her who is in her pure radiance a
beacon ever to the stormtossed heart of man, Mary, star of the sea.
The three girl friends were seated on the rocks, enjoying the evening
scene and the air which was fresh but not too chilly. Many a time and
oft were they wont to come there to that favourite nook to have a cosy
chat beside the sparkling waves and discuss matters feminine, Cissy
Caffrey and Edy Boardman with the baby in the pushcar and Tommy and
Jacky Caffrey, two little curlyheaded boys, dressed in sailor suits
with caps to match and the name _H. M. S. Belleisle_ printed on both.
For Tommy and Jacky Caffrey were twins, scarce four years old and very
noisy and spoiled twins sometimes but for all that darling little
fellows with bright merry faces and endearing ways about them. They
were dabbling in the sand with their spades and buckets, building
castles as children do, or playing with their big coloured ball, happy
as the day was long. And Edy Boardman was rocking the chubby baby to
and fro in the pushcar while that young gentleman fairly chuckled with
delight. He was but eleven months and nine days old and, though still a
tiny toddler, was just beginning to lisp his first babyish words. Cissy
Caffrey bent over to him to tease his fat little plucks and the dainty
dimple in his chin.
—Now, baby, Cissy Caffrey said. Say out big, big. I want a drink of
water.
And baby prattled after her:
—A jink a jink a jawbo.
Cissy Caffrey cuddled the wee chap for she was awfully fond of
children, so patient with little sufferers and Tommy Caffrey could
never be got to take his castor oil unless it was Cissy Caffrey that
held his nose and promised him the scatty heel of the loaf or brown
bread with golden syrup on. What a persuasive power that girl had! But
to be sure baby Boardman was as good as gold, a perfect little dote in
his new fancy bib. None of your spoilt beauties, Flora MacFlimsy sort,
was Cissy Caffrey. A truerhearted lass never drew the breath of life,
always with a laugh in her gipsylike eyes and a frolicsome word on her
cherryripe red lips, a girl lovable in the extreme. And Edy Boardman
laughed too at the quaint language of little brother.
But just then there was a slight altercation between Master Tommy and
Master Jacky. Boys will be boys and our two twins were no exception to
this golden rule. The apple of discord was a certain castle of sand
which Master Jacky had built and Master Tommy would have it right go
wrong that it was to be architecturally improved by a frontdoor like
the Martello tower had. But if Master Tommy was headstrong Master Jacky
was selfwilled too and, true to the maxim that every little Irishman’s
house is his castle, he fell upon his hated rival and to such purpose
that the wouldbe assailant came to grief and (alas to relate!) the
coveted castle too. Needless to say the cries of discomfited Master
Tommy drew the attention of the girl friends.
—Come here, Tommy, his sister called imperatively. At once! And you,
Jacky, for shame to throw poor Tommy in the dirty sand. Wait till I
catch you for that.
His eyes misty with unshed tears Master Tommy came at her call for
their big sister’s word was law with the twins. And in a sad plight he
was too after his misadventure. His little man-o’-war top and
unmentionables were full of sand but Cissy was a past mistress in the
art of smoothing over life’s tiny troubles and very quickly not one
speck of sand was to be seen on his smart little suit. Still the blue
eyes were glistening with hot tears that would well up so she kissed
away the hurtness and shook her hand at Master Jacky the culprit and
said if she was near him she wouldn’t be far from him, her eyes dancing
in admonition.
—Nasty bold Jacky! she cried.
She put an arm round the little mariner and coaxed winningly:
—What’s your name? Butter and cream?
—Tell us who is your sweetheart, spoke Edy Boardman. Is Cissy your
sweetheart?
—Nao, tearful Tommy said.
—Is Edy Boardman your sweetheart? Cissy queried.
—Nao, Tommy said.
—I know, Edy Boardman said none too amiably with an arch glance from
her shortsighted eyes. I know who is Tommy’s sweetheart. Gerty is
Tommy’s sweetheart.
—Nao, Tommy said on the verge of tears.
Cissy’s quick motherwit guessed what was amiss and she whispered to Edy
Boardman to take him there behind the pushcar where the gentleman
couldn’t see and to mind he didn’t wet his new tan shoes.
But who was Gerty?
Gerty MacDowell who was seated near her companions, lost in thought,
gazing far away into the distance was, in very truth, as fair a
specimen of winsome Irish girlhood as one could wish to see. She was
pronounced beautiful by all who knew her though, as folks often said,
she was more a Giltrap than a MacDowell. Her figure was slight and
graceful, inclining even to fragility but those iron jelloids she had
been taking of late had done her a world of good much better than the
Widow Welch’s female pills and she was much better of those discharges
she used to get and that tired feeling. The waxen pallor of her face
was almost spiritual in its ivorylike purity though her rosebud mouth
was a genuine Cupid’s bow, Greekly perfect. Her hands were of finely
veined alabaster with tapering fingers and as white as lemonjuice and
queen of ointments could make them though it was not true that she used
to wear kid gloves in bed or take a milk footbath either. Bertha Supple
told that once to Edy Boardman, a deliberate lie, when she was black
out at daggers drawn with Gerty (the girl chums had of course their
little tiffs from time to time like the rest of mortals) and she told
her not to let on whatever she did that it was her that told her or
she’d never speak to her again. No. Honour where honour is due. There
was an innate refinement, a languid queenly _hauteur_ about Gerty which
was unmistakably evidenced in her delicate hands and higharched instep.
Had kind fate but willed her to be born a gentlewoman of high degree in
her own right and had she only received the benefit of a good education
Gerty MacDowell might easily have held her own beside any lady in the
land and have seen herself exquisitely gowned with jewels on her brow
and patrician suitors at her feet vying with one another to pay their
devoirs to her. Mayhap it was this, the love that might have been, that
lent to her softlyfeatured face at whiles a look, tense with suppressed
meaning, that imparted a strange yearning tendency to the beautiful
eyes, a charm few could resist. Why have women such eyes of witchery?
Gerty’s were of the bluest Irish blue, set off by lustrous lashes and
dark expressive brows. Time was when those brows were not so silkily
seductive. It was Madame Vera Verity, directress of the Woman Beautiful
page of the Princess Novelette, who had first advised her to try
eyebrowleine which gave that haunting expression to the eyes, so
becoming in leaders of fashion, and she had never regretted it. Then
there was blushing scientifically cured and how to be tall increase
your height and you have a beautiful face but your nose? That would
suit Mrs Dignam because she had a button one. But Gerty’s crowning
glory was her wealth of wonderful hair. It was dark brown with a
natural wave in it. She had cut it that very morning on account of the
new moon and it nestled about her pretty head in a profusion of
luxuriant clusters and pared her nails too, Thursday for wealth. And
just now at Edy’s words as a telltale flush, delicate as the faintest
rosebloom, crept into her cheeks she looked so lovely in her sweet
girlish shyness that of a surety God’s fair land of Ireland did not
hold her equal.
For an instant she was silent with rather sad downcast eyes. She was
about to retort but something checked the words on her tongue.
Inclination prompted her to speak out: dignity told her to be silent.
The pretty lips pouted awhile but then she glanced up and broke out
into a joyous little laugh which had in it all the freshness of a young
May morning. She knew right well, no-one better, what made squinty Edy
say that because of him cooling in his attentions when it was simply a
lovers’ quarrel. As per usual somebody’s nose was out of joint about
the boy that had the bicycle off the London bridge road always riding
up and down in front of her window. Only now his father kept him in in
the evenings studying hard to get an exhibition in the intermediate
that was on and he was going to go to Trinity college to study for a
doctor when he left the high school like his brother W. E. Wylie who
was racing in the bicycle races in Trinity college university. Little
recked he perhaps for what she felt, that dull aching void in her heart
sometimes, piercing to the core. Yet he was young and perchance he
might learn to love her in time. They were protestants in his family
and of course Gerty knew Who came first and after Him the Blessed
Virgin and then Saint Joseph. But he was undeniably handsome with an
exquisite nose and he was what he looked, every inch a gentleman, the
shape of his head too at the back without his cap on that she would
know anywhere something off the common and the way he turned the
bicycle at the lamp with his hands off the bars and also the nice
perfume of those good cigarettes and besides they were both of a size
too he and she and that was why Edy Boardman thought she was so
frightfully clever because he didn’t go and ride up and down in front
of her bit of a garden.
Gerty was dressed simply but with the instinctive taste of a votary of
Dame Fashion for she felt that there was just a might that he might be
out. A neat blouse of electric blue selftinted by dolly dyes (because
it was expected in the _Lady’s Pictorial_ that electric blue would be
worn) with a smart vee opening down to the division and kerchief pocket
(in which she always kept a piece of cottonwool scented with her
favourite perfume because the handkerchief spoiled the sit) and a navy
threequarter skirt cut to the stride showed off her slim graceful
figure to perfection. She wore a coquettish little love of a hat of
wideleaved nigger straw contrast trimmed with an underbrim of eggblue
chenille and at the side a butterfly bow of silk to tone. All Tuesday
week afternoon she was hunting to match that chenille but at last she
found what she wanted at Clery’s summer sales, the very it, slightly
shopsoiled but you would never notice, seven fingers two and a penny.
She did it up all by herself and what joy was hers when she tried it on
then, smiling at the lovely reflection which the mirror gave back to
her! And when she put it on the waterjug to keep the shape she knew
that that would take the shine out of some people she knew. Her shoes
were the newest thing in footwear (Edy Boardman prided herself that she
was very _petite_ but she never had a foot like Gerty MacDowell, a
five, and never would ash, oak or elm) with patent toecaps and just one
smart buckle over her higharched instep. Her wellturned ankle displayed
its perfect proportions beneath her skirt and just the proper amount
and no more of her shapely limbs encased in finespun hose with
highspliced heels and wide garter tops. As for undies they were Gerty’s
chief care and who that knows the fluttering hopes and fears of sweet
seventeen (though Gerty would never see seventeen again) can find it in
his heart to blame her? She had four dinky sets with awfully pretty
stitchery, three garments and nighties extra, and each set slotted with
different coloured ribbons, rosepink, pale blue, mauve and peagreen,
and she aired them herself and blued them when they came home from the
wash and ironed them and she had a brickbat to keep the iron on because
she wouldn’t trust those washerwomen as far as she’d see them scorching
the things. She was wearing the blue for luck, hoping against hope, her
own colour and lucky too for a bride to have a bit of blue somewhere on
her because the green she wore that day week brought grief because his
father brought him in to study for the intermediate exhibition and
because she thought perhaps he might be out because when she was
dressing that morning she nearly slipped up the old pair on her inside
out and that was for luck and lovers’ meeting if you put those things
on inside out or if they got untied that he was thinking about you so
long as it wasn’t of a Friday.
And yet and yet! That strained look on her face! A gnawing sorrow is
there all the time. Her very soul is in her eyes and she would give
worlds to be in the privacy of her own familiar chamber where, giving
way to tears, she could have a good cry and relieve her pentup feelings
though not too much because she knew how to cry nicely before the
mirror. You are lovely, Gerty, it said. The paly light of evening falls
upon a face infinitely sad and wistful. Gerty MacDowell yearns in vain.
Yes, she had known from the very first that her daydream of a marriage
has been arranged and the weddingbells ringing for Mrs Reggy Wylie T.
C. D. (because the one who married the elder brother would be Mrs
Wylie) and in the fashionable intelligence Mrs Gertrude Wylie was
wearing a sumptuous confection of grey trimmed with expensive blue fox
was not to be. He was too young to understand. He would not believe in
love, a woman’s birthright. The night of the party long ago in Stoer’s
(he was still in short trousers) when they were alone and he stole an
arm round her waist she went white to the very lips. He called her
little one in a strangely husky voice and snatched a half kiss (the
first!) but it was only the end of her nose and then he hastened from
the room with a remark about refreshments. Impetuous fellow! Strength
of character had never been Reggy Wylie’s strong point and he who would
woo and win Gerty MacDowell must be a man among men. But waiting,
always waiting to be asked and it was leap year too and would soon be
over. No prince charming is her beau ideal to lay a rare and wondrous
love at her feet but rather a manly man with a strong quiet face who
had not found his ideal, perhaps his hair slightly flecked with grey,
and who would understand, take her in his sheltering arms, strain her
to him in all the strength of his deep passionate nature and comfort
her with a long long kiss. It would be like heaven. For such a one she
yearns this balmy summer eve. With all the heart of her she longs to be
his only, his affianced bride for riches for poor, in sickness in
health, till death us two part, from this to this day forward.
And while Edy Boardman was with little Tommy behind the pushcar she was
just thinking would the day ever come when she could call herself his
little wife to be. Then they could talk about her till they went blue
in the face, Bertha Supple too, and Edy, little spitfire, because she
would be twentytwo in November. She would care for him with creature
comforts too for Gerty was womanly wise and knew that a mere man liked
that feeling of hominess. Her griddlecakes done to a goldenbrown hue
and queen Ann’s pudding of delightful creaminess had won golden
opinions from all because she had a lucky hand also for lighting a
fire, dredge in the fine selfraising flour and always stir in the same
direction, then cream the milk and sugar and whisk well the white of
eggs though she didn’t like the eating part when there were any people
that made her shy and often she wondered why you couldn’t eat something
poetical like violets or roses and they would have a beautifully
appointed drawingroom with pictures and engravings and the photograph
of grandpapa Giltrap’s lovely dog Garryowen that almost talked it was
so human and chintz covers for the chairs and that silver toastrack in
Clery’s summer jumble sales like they have in rich houses. He would be
tall with broad shoulders (she had always admired tall men for a
husband) with glistening white teeth under his carefully trimmed
sweeping moustache and they would go on the continent for their
honeymoon (three wonderful weeks!) and then, when they settled down in
a nice snug and cosy little homely house, every morning they would both
have brekky, simple but perfectly served, for their own two selves and
before he went out to business he would give his dear little wifey a
good hearty hug and gaze for a moment deep down into her eyes.
Edy Boardman asked Tommy Caffrey was he done and he said yes so then
she buttoned up his little knickerbockers for him and told him to run
off and play with Jacky and to be good now and not to fight. But Tommy
said he wanted the ball and Edy told him no that baby was playing with
the ball and if he took it there’d be wigs on the green but Tommy said
it was his ball and he wanted his ball and he pranced on the ground, if
you please. The temper of him! O, he was a man already was little Tommy
Caffrey since he was out of pinnies. Edy told him no, no and to be off
now with him and she told Cissy Caffrey not to give in to him.
—You’re not my sister, naughty Tommy said. It’s my ball.
But Cissy Caffrey told baby Boardman to look up, look up high at her
finger and she snatched the ball quickly and threw it along the sand
and Tommy after it in full career, having won the day.
—Anything for a quiet life, laughed Ciss.
And she tickled tiny tot’s two cheeks to make him forget and played
here’s the lord mayor, here’s his two horses, here’s his gingerbread
carriage and here he walks in, chinchopper, chinchopper, chinchopper
chin. But Edy got as cross as two sticks about him getting his own way
like that from everyone always petting him.
—I’d like to give him something, she said, so I would, where I won’t
say.
—On the beeoteetom, laughed Cissy merrily.
Gerty MacDowell bent down her head and crimsoned at the idea of Cissy
saying an unladylike thing like that out loud she’d be ashamed of her
life to say, flushing a deep rosy red, and Edy Boardman said she was
sure the gentleman opposite heard what she said. But not a pin cared
Ciss.
—Let him! she said with a pert toss of her head and a piquant tilt of
her nose. Give it to him too on the same place as quick as I’d look at
him.
Madcap Ciss with her golliwog curls. You had to laugh at her sometimes.
For instance when she asked you would you have some more Chinese tea
and jaspberry ram and when she drew the jugs too and the men’s faces on
her nails with red ink make you split your sides or when she wanted to
go where you know she said she wanted to run and pay a visit to the
Miss White. That was just like Cissycums. O, and will you ever forget
her the evening she dressed up in her father’s suit and hat and the
burned cork moustache and walked down Tritonville road, smoking a
cigarette. There was none to come up to her for fun. But she was
sincerity itself, one of the bravest and truest hearts heaven ever
made, not one of your twofaced things, too sweet to be wholesome.
And then there came out upon the air the sound of voices and the
pealing anthem of the organ. It was the men’s temperance retreat
conducted by the missioner, the reverend John Hughes S. J., rosary,
sermon and benediction of the Most Blessed Sacrament. They were there
gathered together without distinction of social class (and a most
edifying spectacle it was to see) in that simple fane beside the waves,
after the storms of this weary world, kneeling before the feet of the
immaculate, reciting the litany of Our Lady of Loreto, beseeching her
to intercede for them, the old familiar words, holy Mary, holy virgin
of virgins. How sad to poor Gerty’s ears! Had her father only avoided
the clutches of the demon drink, by taking the pledge or those powders
the drink habit cured in Pearson’s Weekly, she might now be rolling in
her carriage, second to none. Over and over had she told herself that
as she mused by the dying embers in a brown study without the lamp
because she hated two lights or oftentimes gazing out of the window
dreamily by the hour at the rain falling on the rusty bucket, thinking.
But that vile decoction which has ruined so many hearths and homes had
cast its shadow over her childhood days. Nay, she had even witnessed in
the home circle deeds of violence caused by intemperance and had seen
her own father, a prey to the fumes of intoxication, forget himself
completely for if there was one thing of all things that Gerty knew it
was that the man who lifts his hand to a woman save in the way of
kindness, deserves to be branded as the lowest of the low.
And still the voices sang in supplication to the Virgin most powerful,
Virgin most merciful. And Gerty, rapt in thought, scarce saw or heard
her companions or the twins at their boyish gambols or the gentleman
off Sandymount green that Cissy Caffrey called the man that was so like
himself passing along the strand taking a short walk. You never saw him
any way screwed but still and for all that she would not like him for a
father because he was too old or something or on account of his face
(it was a palpable case of Doctor Fell) or his carbuncly nose with the
pimples on it and his sandy moustache a bit white under his nose. Poor
father! With all his faults she loved him still when he sang _Tell me,
Mary, how to woo thee_ or _My love and cottage near Rochelle_ and they
had stewed cockles and lettuce with Lazenby’s salad dressing for supper
and when he sang _The moon hath raised_ with Mr Dignam that died
suddenly and was buried, God have mercy on him, from a stroke. Her
mother’s birthday that was and Charley was home on his holidays and Tom
and Mr Dignam and Mrs and Patsy and Freddy Dignam and they were to have
had a group taken. No-one would have thought the end was so near. Now
he was laid to rest. And her mother said to him to let that be a
warning to him for the rest of his days and he couldn’t even go to the
funeral on account of the gout and she had to go into town to bring him
the letters and samples from his office about Catesby’s cork lino,
artistic, standard designs, fit for a palace, gives tiptop wear and
always bright and cheery in the home.
A sterling good daughter was Gerty just like a second mother in the
house, a ministering angel too with a little heart worth its weight in
gold. And when her mother had those raging splitting headaches who was
it rubbed the menthol cone on her forehead but Gerty though she didn’t
like her mother’s taking pinches of snuff and that was the only single
thing they ever had words about, taking snuff. Everyone thought the
world of her for her gentle ways. It was Gerty who turned off the gas
at the main every night and it was Gerty who tacked up on the wall of
that place where she never forgot every fortnight the chlorate of lime
Mr Tunney the grocer’s christmas almanac, the picture of halcyon days
where a young gentleman in the costume they used to wear then with a
threecornered hat was offering a bunch of flowers to his ladylove with
oldtime chivalry through her lattice window. You could see there was a
story behind it. The colours were done something lovely. She was in a
soft clinging white in a studied attitude and the gentleman was in
chocolate and he looked a thorough aristocrat. She often looked at them
dreamily when she went there for a certain purpose and felt her own
arms that were white and soft just like hers with the sleeves back and
thought about those times because she had found out in Walker’s
pronouncing dictionary that belonged to grandpapa Giltrap about the
halcyon days what they meant.
The twins were now playing in the most approved brotherly fashion till
at last Master Jacky who was really as bold as brass there was no
getting behind that deliberately kicked the ball as hard as ever he
could down towards the seaweedy rocks. Needless to say poor Tommy was
not slow to voice his dismay but luckily the gentleman in black who was
sitting there by himself came gallantly to the rescue and intercepted
the ball. Our two champions claimed their plaything with lusty cries
and to avoid trouble Cissy Caffrey called to the gentleman to throw it
to her please. The gentleman aimed the ball once or twice and then
threw it up the strand towards Cissy Caffrey but it rolled down the
slope and stopped right under Gerty’s skirt near the little pool by the
rock. The twins clamoured again for it and Cissy told her to kick it
away and let them fight for it so Gerty drew back her foot but she
wished their stupid ball hadn’t come rolling down to her and she gave a
kick but she missed and Edy and Cissy laughed.
—If you fail try again, Edy Boardman said.
Which was the occasion, says Mr
Vincent, of the composing by a boatswain of that rollicking chanty:
_—Pope Peter’s but a pissabed.
A man’s a man for a’ that._
What anagrams had he made on his name in youth?
Leopold Bloom
Ellpodbomool
Molldopeloob
Bollopedoom
Old Ollebo, M. P.
What acrostic upon the abbreviation of his first name had he (kinetic
poet) sent to Miss Marion (Molly) Tweedy on the 14 February 1888?
     Poets oft have sung in rhyme
     Of music sweet their praise divine.
     Let them hymn it nine times nine.
     Dearer far than song or wine.
     You are mine. The world is mine.
What had prevented him from completing a topical song (music by R. G.
Johnston) on the events of the past, or fixtures for the actual, years,
entitled _If Brian Boru could but come back and see old Dublin now_,
commissioned by Michael Gunn, lessee of the Gaiety Theatre, 46, 47, 48,
49 South King street, and to be introduced into the sixth scene, the
valley of diamonds, of the second edition (30 January 1893) of the
grand annual Christmas pantomime _Sinbad the Sailor_ (produced by R.
Shelton 26 December 1892, written by Greenleaf Whittier, scenery by
George A. Jackson and Cecil Hicks, costumes by Mrs and Miss Whelan
under the personal supervision of Mrs Michael Gunn, ballets by Jessie
Noir, harlequinade by Thomas Otto) and sung by Nelly Bouverist,
principal girl?
Firstly, oscillation between events of imperial and of local interest,
the anticipated diamond jubilee of Queen Victoria (born 1820, acceded
1837) and the posticipated opening of the new municipal fish market:
secondly, apprehension of opposition from extreme circles on the
questions of the respective visits of Their Royal Highnesses the duke
and duchess of York (real) and of His Majesty King Brian Boru
(imaginary): thirdly, a conflict between professional etiquette and
professional emulation concerning the recent erections of the Grand
Lyric Hall on Burgh Quay and the Theatre Royal in Hawkins street:
fourthly, distraction resultant from compassion for Nelly Bouverist’s
non-intellectual, non-political, non-topical expression of countenance
and concupiscence caused by Nelly Bouverist’s revelations of white
articles of non-intellectual, non-political, non-topical underclothing
while she (Nelly Bouverist) was in the articles: fifthly, the
difficulties of the selection of appropriate music and humorous
allusions from _Everybody’s Book of Jokes_ (1000 pages and a laugh in
every one): sixthly, the rhymes, homophonous and cacophonous,
associated with the names of the new lord mayor, Daniel Tallon, the new
high sheriff, Thomas Pile and the new solicitorgeneral, Dunbar Plunket
Barton.
What relation existed between their ages?
16 years before in 1888 when Bloom was of Stephen’s present age Stephen
was 6. 16 years after in 1920 when Stephen would be of Bloom’s present
age Bloom would be 54. In 1936 when Bloom would be 70 and Stephen 54
their ages initially in the ratio of 16 to 0 would be as 17 1/2 to 13
1/2, the proportion increasing and the disparity diminishing according
as arbitrary future years were added, for if the proportion existing in
1883 had continued immutable, conceiving that to be possible, till then
1904 when Stephen was 22 Bloom would be 374 and in 1920 when Stephen
would be 38, as Bloom then was, Bloom would be 646 while in 1952 when
Stephen would have attained the maximum postdiluvian age of 70 Bloom,
being 1190 years alive having been born in the year 714, would have
surpassed by 221 years the maximum antediluvian age, that of
Methusalah, 969 years, while, if Stephen would continue to live until
he would attain that age in the year 3072 A.D., Bloom would have been
obliged to have been alive 83,300 years, having been obliged to have
been born in the year 81,396 B.C.
What events might nullify these calculations?
The cessation of existence of both or either, the inauguration of a new
era or calendar, the annihilation of the world and consequent
extermination of the human species, inevitable but impredictable.
How many previous encounters proved their preexisting acquaintance?
Two. The first in the lilacgarden of Matthew Dillon’s house, Medina
Villa, Kimmage road, Roundtown, in 1887, in the company of Stephen’s
mother, Stephen being then of the age of 5 and reluctant to give his
hand in salutation. The second in the coffeeroom of Breslin’s hotel on
a rainy Sunday in the January of 1892, in the company of Stephen’s
father and Stephen’s granduncle, Stephen being then 5 years older.
Did Bloom accept the invitation to dinner given then by the son and
afterwards seconded by the father?
Very gratefully, with grateful appreciation, with sincere appreciative
gratitude, in appreciatively grateful sincerity of regret, he declined.
Did their conversation on the subject of these reminiscences reveal a
third connecting link between them?
Mrs Riordan (Dante), a widow of independent means, had resided in the
house of Stephen’s parents from 1 September 1888 to 29 December 1891
and had also resided during the years 1892, 1893 and 1894 in the City
Arms Hotel owned by Elizabeth O’Dowd of 54 Prussia street where, during
parts of the years 1893 and 1894, she had been a constant informant of
Bloom who resided also in the same hotel, being at that time a clerk in
the employment of Joseph Cuffe of 5 Smithfield for the superintendence
of sales in the adjacent Dublin Cattle market on the North Circular
road.
Had he performed any special corporal work of mercy for her?
He had sometimes propelled her on warm summer evenings, an infirm widow
of independent, if limited, means, in her convalescent bathchair with
slow revolutions of its wheels as far as the corner of the North
Circular road opposite Mr Gavin Low’s place of business where she had
remained for a certain time scanning through his onelensed binocular
fieldglasses unrecognisable citizens on tramcars, roadster bicycles
equipped with inflated pneumatic tyres, hackney carriages, tandems,
private and hired landaus, dogcarts, ponytraps and brakes passing from
the city to the Phoenix Park and _vice versa_.
Why could he then support that his vigil with the greater equanimity?
Because in middle youth he had often sat observing through a rondel of
bossed glass of a multicoloured pane the spectacle offered with
continual changes of the thoroughfare without, pedestrians, quadrupeds,
velocipedes, vehicles, passing slowly, quickly, evenly, round and round
and round the rim of a round and round precipitous globe.
What distinct different memories had each of her now eight years
deceased?
The older, her bezique cards and counters, her Skye terrier, her
suppositious wealth, her lapses of responsiveness and incipient
catarrhal deafness: the younger, her lamp of colza oil before the
statue of the Immaculate Conception, her green and maroon brushes for
Charles Stewart Parnell and for Michael Davitt, her tissue papers.
Were there no means still remaining to him to achieve the rejuvenation
which these reminiscences divulged to a younger companion rendered the
more desirable?
The indoor exercises, formerly intermittently practised, subsequently
abandoned, prescribed in Eugen Sandow’s _Physical Strength and How to
Obtain It_ which, designed particularly for commercial men engaged in
sedentary occupations, were to be made with mental concentration in
front of a mirror so as to bring into play the various families of
muscles and produce successively a pleasant rigidity, a more pleasant
relaxation and the most pleasant repristination of juvenile agility.
Had any special agility been his in earlier youth?
Though ringweight lifting had been beyond his strength and the full
circle gyration beyond his courage yet as a High school scholar he had
excelled in his stable and protracted execution of the half lever
movement on the parallel bars in consequence of his abnormally
developed abdominal muscles.
Did either openly allude to their racial difference?
Neither.
What, reduced to their simplest reciprocal form, were Bloom’s thoughts
about Stephen’s thoughts about Bloom and about Stephen’s thoughts about
Bloom’s thoughts about Stephen?
He thought that he thought that he was a jew whereas he knew that he
knew that he knew that he was not.
What, the enclosures of reticence removed, were their respective
parentages?
Bloom, only born male transubstantial heir of Rudolf Virag
(subsequently Rudolph Bloom) of Szombathely, Vienna, Budapest, Milan,
London and Dublin and of Ellen Higgins, second daughter of Julius
Higgins (born Karoly) and Fanny Higgins (born Hegarty). Stephen, eldest
surviving male consubstantial heir of Simon Dedalus of Cork and Dublin
and of Mary, daughter of Richard and Christina Goulding (born Grier).
Had Bloom and Stephen been baptised, and where and by whom, cleric or
layman?
Bloom (three times), by the reverend Mr Gilmer Johnston M. A., alone,
in the protestant church of Saint Nicholas Without, Coombe, by James
O’Connor, Philip Gilligan and James Fitzpatrick, together, under a pump
in the village of Swords, and by the reverend Charles Malone C. C., in
the church of the Three Patrons, Rathgar. Stephen (once) by the
reverend Charles Malone C. C., alone, in the church of the Three
Patrons, Rathgar.
Did they find their educational careers similar?
Substituting Stephen for Bloom Stoom would have passed successively
through a dame’s school and the high school. Substituting Bloom for
Stephen Blephen would have passed successively through the preparatory,
junior, middle and senior grades of the intermediate and through the
matriculation, first arts, second arts and arts degree courses of the
royal university.
Why did Bloom refrain from stating that he had frequented the
university of life?
Because of his fluctuating incertitude as to whether this observation
had or had not been already made by him to Stephen or by Stephen to
him.
What two temperaments did they individually represent?
The scientific. The artistic.
What proofs did Bloom adduce to prove that his tendency was towards
applied, rather than towards pure, science?
Certain possible inventions of which he had cogitated when reclining in
a state of supine repletion to aid digestion, stimulated by his
appreciation of the importance of inventions now common but once
revolutionary, for example, the aeronautic parachute, the reflecting
telescope, the spiral corkscrew, the safety pin, the mineral water
siphon, the canal lock with winch and sluice, the suction pump.
Were these inventions principally intended for an improved scheme of
kindergarten?
Yes, rendering obsolete popguns, elastic airbladders, games of hazard,
catapults. They comprised astronomical kaleidoscopes exhibiting the
twelve constellations of the zodiac from Aries to Pisces, miniature
mechanical orreries, arithmetical gelatine lozenges, geometrical to
correspond with zoological biscuits, globemap playing balls,
historically costumed dolls.
What also stimulated him in his cogitations?
The financial success achieved by Ephraim Marks and Charles A. James,
the former by his 1d bazaar at 42 George’s street, south, the latter at
his 6 1/2d shop and world’s fancy fair and waxwork exhibition at 30
Henry street, admission 2d, children 1d: and the infinite possibilities
hitherto unexploited of the modern art of advertisement if condensed in
triliteral monoideal symbols, vertically of maximum visibility
(divined), horizontally of maximum legibility (deciphered) and of
magnetising efficacy to arrest involuntary attention, to interest, to
convince, to decide.
Such as?
K. 11. Kino’s 11/— Trousers.
House of Keys. Alexander J. Keyes.
Such as not?
Look at this long candle. Calculate when it burns out and you receive
gratis 1 pair of our special non-compo boots, guaranteed 1 candle
power. Address: Barclay and Cook, 18 Talbot street.
Bacilikil (Insect Powder).
Veribest (Boot Blacking).
Uwantit (Combined pocket twoblade penknife with corkscrew, nailfile and
pipecleaner).
Such as never?
What is home without Plumtree’s Potted Meat?
Incomplete.
With it an abode of bliss.
Manufactured by George Plumtree, 23 Merchants’ quay, Dublin, put up in
4 oz pots, and inserted by Councillor Joseph P. Nannetti, M. P.,
Rotunda Ward, 19 Hardwicke street, under the obituary notices and
anniversaries of deceases. The name on the label is Plumtree. A
plumtree in a meatpot, registered trade mark. Beware of imitations.
Peatmot. Trumplee. Moutpat. Plamtroo.
Which example did he adduce to induce Stephen to deduce that
originality, though producing its own reward, does not invariably
conduce to success?
His own ideated and rejected project of an illuminated showcart, drawn
by a beast of burden, in which two smartly dressed girls were to be
seated engaged in writing.
What suggested scene was then constructed by Stephen?
Solitary hotel in mountain pass. Autumn. Twilight. Fire lit. In dark
corner young man seated. Young woman enters. Restless. Solitary. She
sits. She goes to window. She stands. She sits. Twilight. She thinks.
On solitary hotel paper she writes. She thinks. She writes. She sighs.
Wheels and hoofs. She hurries out. He comes from his dark corner. He
seizes solitary paper. He holds it towards fire. Twilight. He reads.
Solitary.
What?
In sloping, upright and backhands: Queen’s Hotel, Queen’s Hotel,
Queen’s Hotel. Queen’s Ho...
What suggested scene was then reconstructed by Bloom?
The Queen’s Hotel, Ennis, county Clare, where Rudolph Bloom (Rudolf
Virag) died on the evening of the 27 June 1886, at some hour unstated,
in consequence of an overdose of monkshood (aconite) selfadministered
in the form of a neuralgic liniment composed of 2 parts of aconite
liniment to 1 of chloroform liniment (purchased by him at 10.20 a.m. on
the morning of 27 June 1886 at the medical hall of Francis Dennehy, 17
Church street, Ennis) after having, though not in consequence of
having, purchased at 3.15 p.m. on the afternoon of 27 June 1886 a new
boater straw hat, extra smart (after having, though not in consequence
of having, purchased at the hour and in the place aforesaid, the toxin
aforesaid), at the general drapery store of James Cullen, 4 Main
street, Ennis.
Did he attribute this homonymity to information or coincidence or
intuition?
Coincidence.
Did he depict the scene verbally for his guest to see?
He preferred himself to see another’s face and listen to another’s
words by which potential narration was realised and kinetic temperament
relieved.
Did he see only a second coincidence in the second scene narrated to
him, described by the narrator as _A Pisgah Sight of Palestine_ or _The
Parable of the Plums_?
It, with the preceding scene and with others unnarrated but existent by
implication, to which add essays on various subjects or moral apothegms
(e.g. _My Favourite Hero_ or _Procrastination is the Thief of Time_)
composed during schoolyears, seemed to him to contain in itself and in
conjunction with the personal equation certain possibilities of
financial, social, personal and sexual success, whether specially
collected and selected as model pedagogic themes (of cent per cent
merit) for the use of preparatory and junior grade students or
contributed in printed form, following the precedent of Philip Beaufoy
or Doctor Dick or Heblon’s _Studies in Blue_, to a publication of
certified circulation and solvency or employed verbally as intellectual
stimulation for sympathetic auditors, tacitly appreciative of
successful narrative and confidently augurative of successful
achievement, during the increasingly longer nights gradually following
the summer solstice on the day but three following, videlicet, Tuesday,
21 June (S. Aloysius Gonzaga), sunrise 3.33 a.m., sunset 8.29 p.m.
Which domestic problem as much as, if not more than, any other
frequently engaged his mind?
What to do with our wives.
What had been his hypothetical singular solutions?
Parlour games (dominos, halma, tiddledywinks, spilikins, cup and ball,
nap, spoil five, bezique, twentyfive, beggar my neighbour, draughts,
chess or backgammon): embroidery, darning or knitting for the
policeaided clothing society: musical duets, mandoline and guitar,
piano and flute, guitar and piano: legal scrivenery or envelope
addressing: biweekly visits to variety entertainments: commercial
activity as pleasantly commanding and pleasingly obeyed mistress
proprietress in a cool dairy shop or warm cigar divan: the clandestine
satisfaction of erotic irritation in masculine brothels, state
inspected and medically controlled: social visits, at regular
infrequent prevented intervals and with regular frequent preventive
superintendence, to and from female acquaintances of recognised
respectability in the vicinity: courses of evening instruction
specially designed to render liberal instruction agreeable.
What instances of deficient mental development in his wife inclined him
in favour of the lastmentioned (ninth) solution?
In disoccupied moments she had more than once covered a sheet of paper
with signs and hieroglyphics which she stated were Greek and Irish and
Hebrew characters. She had interrogated constantly at varying intervals
as to the correct method of writing the capital initial of the name of
a city in Canada, Quebec. She understood little of political
complications, internal, or balance of power, external. In calculating
the addenda of bills she frequently had recourse to digital aid. After
completion of laconic epistolary compositions she abandoned the
implement of calligraphy in the encaustic pigment, exposed to the
corrosive action of copperas, green vitriol and nutgall. Unusual
polysyllables of foreign origin she interpreted phonetically or by
false analogy or by both: metempsychosis (met him pike hoses), _alias_
(a mendacious person mentioned in sacred scripture).
What compensated in the false balance of her intelligence for these and
such deficiencies of judgment regarding persons, places and things?
The false apparent parallelism of all perpendicular arms of all
balances, proved true by construction. The counterbalance of her
proficiency of judgment regarding one person, proved true by
experiment.
How had he attempted to remedy this state of comparative ignorance?
Variously. By leaving in a conspicuous place a certain book open at a
certain page: by assuming in her, when alluding explanatorily, latent
knowledge: by open ridicule in her presence of some absent other’s
ignorant lapse.
With what success had he attempted direct instruction?
She followed not all, a part of the whole, gave attention with interest
comprehended with surprise, with care repeated, with greater difficulty
remembered, forgot with ease, with misgiving reremembered, rerepeated
with error.
What system had proved more effective?
Indirect suggestion implicating selfinterest.
Example?
She disliked umbrella with rain, he liked woman with umbrella, she
disliked new hat with rain, he liked woman with new hat, he bought new
hat with rain, she carried umbrella with new hat.
Accepting the analogy implied in his guest’s parable which examples of
postexilic eminence did he adduce?
Three seekers of the pure truth, Moses of Egypt, Moses Maimonides,
author of _More Nebukim_ (Guide of the Perplexed) and Moses Mendelssohn
of such eminence that from Moses (of Egypt) to Moses (Mendelssohn)
there arose none like Moses (Maimonides).
What statement was made, under correction, by Bloom concerning a fourth
seeker of pure truth, by name Aristotle, mentioned, with permission, by
Stephen?
That the seeker mentioned had been a pupil of a rabbinical philosopher,
name uncertain.
Were other anapocryphal illustrious sons of the law and children of a
selected or rejected race mentioned?
Felix Bartholdy Mendelssohn (composer), Baruch Spinoza (philosopher),
Mendoza (pugilist), Ferdinand Lassalle (reformer, duellist).
What fragments of verse from the ancient Hebrew and ancient Irish
languages were cited with modulations of voice and translation of texts
by guest to host and by host to guest?
By Stephen: _suil, suil, suil arun, suil go siocair agus suil go cuin_
(walk, walk, walk your way, walk in safety, walk with care).
By Bloom: _Kifeloch, harimon rakatejch m’baad l’zamatejch_ (thy temple
amid thy hair is as a slice of pomegranate).
How was a glyphic comparison of the phonic symbols of both languages
made in substantiation of the oral comparison?
By juxtaposition. On the penultimate blank page of a book of inferior
literary style, entituled _Sweets of Sin_ (produced by Bloom and so
manipulated that its front cover came in contact with the surface of
the table) with a pencil (supplied by Stephen) Stephen wrote the Irish
characters for gee, eh, dee, em, simple and modified, and Bloom in turn
wrote the Hebrew characters ghimel, aleph, daleth and (in the absence
of mem) a substituted qoph, explaining their arithmetical values as
ordinal and cardinal numbers, videlicet 3, 1, 4, and 100.
Was the knowledge possessed by both of each of these languages, the
extinct and the revived, theoretical or practical?
Theoretical, being confined to certain grammatical rules of accidence
and syntax and practically excluding vocabulary.
What points of contact existed between these languages and between the
peoples who spoke them?
The presence of guttural sounds, diacritic aspirations, epenthetic and
servile letters in both languages: their antiquity, both having been
taught on the plain of Shinar 242 years after the deluge in the
seminary instituted by Fenius Farsaigh, descendant of Noah, progenitor
of Israel, and ascendant of Heber and Heremon, progenitors of Ireland:
their archaeological, genealogical, hagiographical, exegetical,
homiletic, toponomastic, historical and religious literatures
comprising the works of rabbis and culdees, Torah, Talmud (Mischna and
Ghemara), Massor, Pentateuch, Book of the Dun Cow, Book of Ballymote,
Garland of Howth, Book of Kells: their dispersal, persecution, survival
and revival: the isolation of their synagogical and ecclesiastical
rites in ghetto (S. Mary’s Abbey) and masshouse (Adam and Eve’s
tavern): the proscription of their national costumes in penal laws and
jewish dress acts: the restoration in Chanah David of Zion and the
possibility of Irish political autonomy or devolution.
What anthem did Bloom chant partially in anticipation of that multiple,
ethnically irreducible consummation?
     Kolod balejwaw pnimah
     Nefesch, jehudi, homijah.
Why was the chant arrested at the conclusion of this first distich?
In consequence of defective mnemotechnic.
How did the chanter compensate for this deficiency?
By a periphrastic version of the general text.
In what common study did their mutual reflections merge?
The increasing simplification traceable from the Egyptian epigraphic
hieroglyphs to the Greek and Roman alphabets and the anticipation of
modern stenography and telegraphic code in the cuneiform inscriptions
(Semitic) and the virgular quinquecostate ogham writing (Celtic).
Did the guest comply with his host’s request?
Doubly, by appending his signature in Irish and Roman characters.
What was Stephen’s auditive sensation?
He heard in a profound ancient male unfamiliar melody the accumulation
of the past.
What was Bloom’s visual sensation?
He saw in a quick young male familiar form the predestination of a
future.
What were Stephen’s and Bloom’s quasisimultaneous volitional
quasisensations of concealed identities?
Visually, Stephen’s: The traditional figure of hypostasis, depicted by
Johannes Damascenus, Lentulus Romanus and Epiphanius Monachus as
leucodermic, sesquipedalian with winedark hair.
Auditively, Bloom’s: The traditional accent of the ecstasy of
catastrophe.
What future careers had been possible for Bloom in the past and with
what exemplars?
In the church, Roman, Anglican or Nonconformist: exemplars, the very
reverend John Conmee S. J., the reverend T. Salmon, D. D., provost of
Trinity college, Dr Alexander J. Dowie. At the bar, English or Irish:
exemplars, Seymour Bushe, K. C., Rufus Isaacs, K. C. On the stage,
modern or Shakespearean: exemplars, Charles Wyndham, high comedian,
Osmond Tearle († 1901), exponent of Shakespeare.
Did the host encourage his guest to chant in a modulated voice a
strange legend on an allied theme?
Reassuringly, their place, where none could hear them talk, being
secluded, reassured, the decocted beverages, allowing for subsolid
residual sediment of a mechanical mixture, water plus sugar plus cream
plus cocoa, having been consumed.
Recite the first (major) part of this chanted legend.
     Little Harry Hughes and his schoolfellows all
     Went out for to play ball.
     And the very first ball little Harry Hughes played
     He drove it o’er the jew’s garden wall.
     And the very second ball little Harry Hughes played
     He broke the jew’s windows all.
littleharryhughes
How did the son of Rudolph receive this first part?
With unmixed feeling. Smiling, a jew, he heard with pleasure and saw
the unbroken kitchen window.
Recite the second part (minor) of the legend.
     Then out there came the jew’s daughter
     And she all dressed in green.
     “Come back, come back, you pretty little boy,
     And play your ball again.”
     
     I can’t come back and I won’t come back
     Without my schoolfellows all.
     For if my master he did hear
     He’d make it a sorry ball.”
     She took him by the lilywhite hand
     And led him along the hall
     Until she led him to a room
     Where none could hear him call.
     She took a penknife out of her pocket
     And cut off his little head.
     And now he’ll play his ball no more
     For he lies among the dead.
outcamethejew
How did the father of Millicent receive this second part?
With mixed feelings. Unsmiling, he heard and saw with wonder a jew’s
daughter, all dressed in green.
Condense Stephen’s commentary.
One of all, the least of all, is the victim predestined. Once by
inadvertence twice by design he challenges his destiny. It comes when
he is abandoned and challenges him reluctant and, as an apparition of
hope and youth, holds him unresisting. It leads him to a strange
habitation, to a secret infidel apartment, and there, implacable,
immolates him, consenting.
Why was the host (victim predestined) sad?
He wished that a tale of a deed should be told of a deed not by him
should by him not be told.
Why was the host (reluctant, unresisting) still?
In accordance with the law of the conservation of energy.
Why was the host (secret infidel) silent?
He weighed the possible evidences for and against ritual murder: the
incitations of the hierarchy, the superstition of the populace, the
propagation of rumour in continued fraction of veridicity, the envy of
opulence, the influence of retaliation, the sporadic reappearance of
atavistic delinquency, the mitigating circumstances of fanaticism,
hypnotic suggestion and somnambulism.
From which (if any) of these mental or physical disorders was he not
totally immune?
From hypnotic suggestion: once, waking, he had not recognised his
sleeping apartment: more than once, waking, he had been for an
indefinite time incapable of moving or uttering sounds. From
somnambulism: once, sleeping, his body had risen, crouched and crawled
in the direction of a heatless fire and, having attained its
destination, there, curled, unheated, in night attire had lain,
sleeping.
Had this latter or any cognate phenomenon declared itself in any member
of his family?
Twice, in Holles street and in Ontario terrace, his daughter Millicent
(Milly) at the ages of 6 and 8 years had uttered in sleep an
exclamation of terror and had replied to the interrogations of two
figures in night attire with a vacant mute expression.
What other infantile memories had he of her?
15 June 1889. A querulous newborn female infant crying to cause and
lessen congestion. A child renamed Padney Socks she shook with shocks
her moneybox: counted his three free moneypenny buttons, one, tloo,
tlee: a doll, a boy, a sailor she cast away: blond, born of two dark,
she had blond ancestry, remote, a violation, Herr Hauptmann Hainau,
Austrian army, proximate, a hallucination, lieutenant Mulvey, British
navy.
What endemic characteristics were present?
Conversely the nasal and frontal formation was derived in a direct line
of lineage which, though interrupted, would continue at distant
intervals to more distant intervals to its most distant intervals.
What memories had he of her adolescence?
She relegated her hoop and skippingrope to a recess. On the duke’s
lawn, entreated by an English visitor, she declined to permit him to
make and take away her photographic image (objection not stated). On
the South Circular road in the company of Elsa Potter, followed by an
individual of sinister aspect, she went half way down Stamer street and
turned abruptly back (reason of change not stated). On the vigil of the
15th anniversary of her birth she wrote a letter from Mullingar, county
Westmeath, making a brief allusion to a local student (faculty and year
not stated).
Did that first division, portending a second division, afflict him?
Less than he had imagined, more than he had hoped.
What second departure was contemporaneously perceived by him similarly,
if differently?
A temporary departure of his cat.
Why similarly, why differently?
Similarly, because actuated by a secret purpose the quest of a new male
(Mullingar student) or of a healing herb (valerian). Differently,
because of different possible returns to the inhabitants or to the
habitation.
In other respects were their differences similar?
In passivity, in economy, in the instinct of tradition, in
unexpectedness.
As?
Inasmuch as leaning she sustained her blond hair for him to ribbon it
for her (cf neckarching cat). Moreover, on the free surface of the lake
in Stephen’s green amid inverted reflections of trees her uncommented
spit, describing concentric circles of waterrings, indicated by the
constancy of its permanence the locus of a somnolent prostrate fish (cf
mousewatching cat). Again, in order to remember the date, combatants,
issue and consequences of a famous military engagement she pulled a
plait of her hair (cf earwashing cat). Furthermore, silly Milly, she
dreamed of having had an unspoken unremembered conversation with a
horse whose name had been Joseph to whom (which) she had offered a
tumblerful of lemonade which it (he) had appeared to have accepted (cf
hearthdreaming cat). Hence, in passivity, in economy, in the instinct
of tradition, in unexpectedness, their differences were similar.
In what way had he utilised gifts (1) an owl, 2) a clock, given as
matrimonial auguries, to interest and to instruct her?
As object lessons to explain: 1) the nature and habits of oviparous
animals, the possibility of aerial flight, certain abnormalities of
vision, the secular process of imbalsamation: 2) the principle of the
pendulum, exemplified in bob, wheelgear and regulator, the translation
in terms of human or social regulation of the various positions of
clockwise moveable indicators on an unmoving dial, the exactitude of
the recurrence per hour of an instant in each hour when the longer and
the shorter indicator were at the same angle of inclination,
_videlicet_, 5 5/11 minutes past each hour per hour in arithmetical
progression.
In what manners did she reciprocate?
She remembered: on the 27th anniversary of his birth she presented to
him a breakfast moustachecup of imitation Crown Derby porcelain ware.
She provided: at quarter day or thereabouts if or when purchases had
been made by him not for her she showed herself attentive to his
necessities, anticipating his desires. She admired: a natural
phenomenon having been explained by him to her she expressed the
immediate desire to possess without gradual acquisition a fraction of
his science, the moiety, the quarter, a thousandth part.
What proposal did Bloom, diambulist, father of Milly, somnambulist,
make to Stephen, noctambulist?
To pass in repose the hours intervening between Thursday (proper) and
Friday (normal) on an extemporised cubicle in the apartment immediately
above the kitchen and immediately adjacent to the sleeping apartment of
his host and hostess.
What various advantages would or might have resulted from a
prolongation of such an extemporisation?
For the guest: security of domicile and seclusion of study. For the
host: rejuvenation of intelligence, vicarious satisfaction. For the
hostess: disintegration of obsession, acquisition of correct Italian
pronunciation.
Why might these several provisional contingencies between a guest and a
hostess not necessarily preclude or be precluded by a permanent
eventuality of reconciliatory union between a schoolfellow and a jew’s
daughter?
Because the way to daughter led through mother, the way to mother
through daughter.
To what inconsequent polysyllabic question of his host did the guest
return a monosyllabic negative answer?
If he had known the late Mrs Emily Sinico, accidentally killed at
Sydney Parade railway station, 14 October 1903.
What inchoate corollary statement was consequently suppressed by the
host?
A statement explanatory of his absence on the occasion of the interment
of Mrs Mary Dedalus (born Goulding), 26 June 1903, vigil of the
anniversary of the decease of Rudolph Bloom (born Virag).
Was the proposal of asylum accepted?
Promptly, inexplicably, with amicability, gratefully it was declined.
What exchange of money took place between host and guest?
The former returned to the latter, without interest, a sum of money (£
1-7-0), one pound seven shillings sterling, advanced by the latter to
the former.
What counterproposals were alternately advanced, accepted, modified,
declined, restated in other terms, reaccepted, ratified, reconfirmed?
To inaugurate a prearranged course of Italian instruction, place the
residence of the instructed. To inaugurate a course of vocal
instruction, place the residence of the instructress. To inaugurate a
series of static, semistatic and peripatetic intellectual dialogues,
places the residence of both speakers (if both speakers were resident
in the same place), the _Ship_ hotel and tavern, 6 Lower Abbey street
(W. and E. Connery, proprietors), the National Library of Ireland, 10
Kildare street, the National Maternity Hospital, 29, 30 and 31 Holles
street, a public garden, the vicinity of a place of worship, a
conjunction of two or more public thoroughfares, the point of bisection
of a right line drawn between their residences (if both speakers were
resident in different places).
What rendered problematic for Bloom the realisation of these mutually
selfexcluding propositions?
The irreparability of the past: once at a performance of Albert
Hengler’s circus in the Rotunda, Rutland square, Dublin, an intuitive
particoloured clown in quest of paternity had penetrated from the ring
to a place in the auditorium where Bloom, solitary, was seated and had
publicly declared to an exhilarated audience that he (Bloom) was his
(the clown’s) papa. The imprevidibility of the future: once in the
summer of 1898 he (Bloom) had marked a florin (2/-) with three notches
on the milled edge and tendered it in payment of an account due to and
received by J. and T. Davy, family grocers, 1 Charlemont Mall, Grand
Canal, for circulation on the waters of civic finance, for possible,
circuitous or direct, return.
Was the clown Bloom’s son?
No.
Had Bloom’s coin returned?
Never.
Why would a recurrent frustration the more depress him?
Because at the critical turningpoint of human existence he desired to
amend many social conditions, the product of inequality and avarice and
international animosity.
He believed then that human life was infinitely perfectible,
eliminating these conditions?
There remained the generic conditions imposed by natural, as distinct
from human law, as integral parts of the human whole: the necessity of
destruction to procure alimentary sustenance: the painful character of
the ultimate functions of separate existence, the agonies of birth and
death: the monotonous menstruation of simian and (particularly) human
females extending from the age of puberty to the menopause: inevitable
accidents at sea, in mines and factories: certain very painful maladies
and their resultant surgical operations, innate lunacy and congenital
criminality, decimating epidemics: catastrophic cataclysms which make
terror the basis of human mentality: seismic upheavals the epicentres
of which are located in densely populated regions: the fact of vital
growth, through convulsions of metamorphosis, from infancy through
maturity to decay.
Why did he desist from speculation?
Because it was a task for a superior intelligence to substitute other
more acceptable phenomena in the place of the less acceptable phenomena
to be removed.
Did Stephen participate in his dejection?
He affirmed his significance as a conscious rational animal proceeding
syllogistically from the known to the unknown and a conscious rational
reagent between a micro and a macrocosm ineluctably constructed upon
the incertitude of the void.
Was this affirmation apprehended by Bloom?
Not verbally. Substantially.
What comforted his misapprehension?
That as a competent keyless citizen he had proceeded energetically from
the unknown to the known through the incertitude of the void.
In what order of precedence, with what attendant ceremony was the
exodus from the house of bondage to the wilderness of inhabitation
effected?
Lighted Candle in Stick borne by
BLOOM
Diaconal Hat on Ashplant borne by
STEPHEN
With what intonation _secreto_ of what commemorative psalm?
The 113th, _modus peregrinus: In exitu Israël de Egypto: domus Jacob de
populo barbaro_.
What did each do at the door of egress?
Bloom set the candlestick on the floor. Stephen put the hat on his
head.
For what creature was the door of egress a door of ingress?
For a cat.
What spectacle confronted them when they, first the host, then the
guest, emerged silently, doubly dark, from obscurity by a passage from
the rere of the house into the penumbra of the garden?
The heaventree of stars hung with humid nightblue fruit.
With what meditations did Bloom accompany his demonstration to his
companion of various constellations?
Meditations of evolution increasingly vaster: of the moon invisible in
incipient lunation, approaching perigee: of the infinite lattiginous
scintillating uncondensed milky way, discernible by daylight by an
observer placed at the lower end of a cylindrical vertical shaft 5000
ft deep sunk from the surface towards the centre of the earth: of
Sirius (alpha in Canis Maior) 10 lightyears (57,000,000,000,000 miles)
distant and in volume 900 times the dimension of our planet: of
Arcturus: of the precession of equinoxes: of Orion with belt and
sextuple sun theta and nebula in which 100 of our solar systems could
be contained: of moribund and of nascent new stars such as Nova in
1901: of our system plunging towards the constellation of Hercules: of
the parallax or parallactic drift of socalled fixed stars, in reality
evermoving wanderers from immeasurably remote eons to infinitely remote
futures in comparison with which the years, threescore and ten, of
allotted human life formed a parenthesis of infinitesimal brevity.
Were there obverse meditations of involution increasingly less vast?
Of the eons of geological periods recorded in the stratifications of
the earth: of the myriad minute entomological organic existences
concealed in cavities of the earth, beneath removable stones, in hives
and mounds, of microbes, germs, bacteria, bacilli, spermatozoa: of the
incalculable trillions of billions of millions of imperceptible
molecules contained by cohesion of molecular affinity in a single
pinhead: of the universe of human serum constellated with red and white
bodies, themselves universes of void space constellated with other
bodies, each, in continuity, its universe of divisible component bodies
of which each was again divisible in divisions of redivisible component
bodies, dividends and divisors ever diminishing without actual division
till, if the progress were carried far enough, nought nowhere was never
reached.
Why did he not elaborate these calculations to a more precise result?
Because some years previously in 1886 when occupied with the problem of
the quadrature of the circle he had learned of the existence of a
number computed to a relative degree of accuracy to be of such
magnitude and of so many places, e.g., the 9th power of the 9th power
of 9, that, the result having been obtained, 33 closely printed volumes
of 1000 pages each of innumerable quires and reams of India paper would
have to be requisitioned in order to contain the complete tale of its
printed integers of units, tens, hundreds, thousands, tens of
thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions, tens of millions, hundreds
of millions, billions, the nucleus of the nebula of every digit of
every series containing succinctly the potentiality of being raised to
the utmost kinetic elaboration of any power of any of its powers.
Did he find the problems of the inhabitability of the planets and their
satellites by a race, given in species, and of the possible social and
moral redemption of said race by a redeemer, easier of solution?
Of a different order of difficulty. Conscious that the human organism,
normally capable of sustaining an atmospheric pressure of 19 tons, when
elevated to a considerable altitude in the terrestrial atmosphere
suffered with arithmetical progression of intensity, according as the
line of demarcation between troposphere and stratosphere was
approximated from nasal hemorrhage, impeded respiration and vertigo,
when proposing this problem for solution, he had conjectured as a
working hypothesis which could not be proved impossible that a more
adaptable and differently anatomically constructed race of beings might
subsist otherwise under Martian, Mercurial, Veneral, Jovian, Saturnian,
Neptunian or Uranian sufficient and equivalent conditions, though an
apogean humanity of beings created in varying forms with finite
differences resulting similar to the whole and to one another would
probably there as here remain inalterably and inalienably attached to
vanities, to vanities of vanities and to all that is vanity.
And the problem of possible redemption?
The minor was proved by the major.
Which various features of the constellations were in turn considered?
The various colours significant of various degrees of vitality (white,
yellow, crimson, vermilion, cinnabar): their degrees of brilliancy:
their magnitudes revealed up to and including the 7th: their positions:
the waggoner’s star: Walsingham way: the chariot of David: the annular
cinctures of Saturn: the condensation of spiral nebulae into suns: the
interdependent gyrations of double suns: the independent synchronous
discoveries of Galileo, Simon Marius, Piazzi, Le Verrier, Herschel,
Galle: the systematisations attempted by Bode and Kepler of cubes of
distances and squares of times of revolution: the almost infinite
compressibility of hirsute comets and their vast elliptical egressive
and reentrant orbits from perihelion to aphelion: the sidereal origin
of meteoric stones: the Libyan floods on Mars about the period of the
birth of the younger astroscopist: the annual recurrence of meteoric
showers about the period of the feast of S. Lawrence (martyr, 10
August): the monthly recurrence known as the new moon with the old moon
in her arms: the posited influence of celestial on human bodies: the
appearance of a star (1st magnitude) of exceeding brilliancy dominating
by night and day (a new luminous sun generated by the collision and
amalgamation in incandescence of two nonluminous exsuns) about the
period of the birth of William Shakespeare over delta in the recumbent
neversetting constellation of Cassiopeia and of a star (2nd magnitude)
of similar origin but of lesser brilliancy which had appeared in and
disappeared from the constellation of the Corona Septentrionalis about
the period of the birth of Leopold Bloom and of other stars of
(presumably) similar origin which had (effectively or presumably)
appeared in and disappeared from the constellation of Andromeda about
the period of the birth of Stephen Dedalus, and in and from the
constellation of Auriga some years after the birth and death of Rudolph
Bloom, junior, and in and from other constellations some years before
or after the birth or death of other persons: the attendant phenomena
of eclipses, solar and lunar, from immersion to emersion, abatement of
wind, transit of shadow, taciturnity of winged creatures, emergence of
nocturnal or crepuscular animals, persistence of infernal light,
obscurity of terrestrial waters, pallor of human beings.
His (Bloom’s) logical conclusion, having weighed the matter and
allowing for possible error?
That it was not a heaventree, not a heavengrot, not a heavenbeast, not
a heavenman. That it was a Utopia, there being no known method from the
known to the unknown: an infinity renderable equally finite by the
suppositious apposition of one or more bodies equally of the same and
of different magnitudes: a mobility of illusory forms immobilised in
space, remobilised in air: a past which possibly had ceased to exist as
a present before its probable spectators had entered actual present
existence.
Was he more convinced of the esthetic value of the spectacle?
Indubitably in consequence of the reiterated examples of poets in the
delirium of the frenzy of attachment or in the abasement of rejection
invoking ardent sympathetic constellations or the frigidity of the
satellite of their planet.
Did he then accept as an article of belief the theory of astrological
influences upon sublunary disasters?
It seemed to him as possible of proof as of confutation and the
nomenclature employed in its selenographical charts as attributable to
verifiable intuition as to fallacious analogy: the lake of dreams, the
sea of rains, the gulf of dews, the ocean of fecundity.
What special affinities appeared to him to exist between the moon and
woman?
Her antiquity in preceding and surviving successive tellurian
generations: her nocturnal predominance: her satellitic dependence: her
luminary reflection: her constancy under all her phases, rising and
setting by her appointed times, waxing and waning: the forced
invariability of her aspect: her indeterminate response to
inaffirmative interrogation: her potency over effluent and refluent
waters: her power to enamour, to mortify, to invest with beauty, to
render insane, to incite to and aid delinquency: the tranquil
inscrutability of her visage: the terribility of her isolated dominant
implacable resplendent propinquity: her omens of tempest and of calm:
the stimulation of her light, her motion and her presence: the
admonition of her craters, her arid seas, her silence: her splendour,
when visible: her attraction, when invisible.
What visible luminous sign attracted Bloom’s, who attracted Stephen’s,
gaze?
In the second storey (rere) of his (Bloom’s) house the light of a
paraffin oil lamp with oblique shade projected on a screen of roller
blind supplied by Frank O’Hara, window blind, curtain pole and
revolving shutter manufacturer, 16 Aungier street.
How did he elucidate the mystery of an invisible attractive person, his
wife Marion (Molly) Bloom, denoted by a visible splendid sign, a lamp?
With indirect and direct verbal allusions or affirmations: with subdued
affection and admiration: with description: with impediment: with
suggestion.
Both then were silent?
Silent, each contemplating the other in both mirrors of the reciprocal
flesh of theirhisnothis fellowfaces.
Were they indefinitely inactive?
At Stephen’s suggestion, at Bloom’s instigation both, first Stephen,
then Bloom, in penumbra urinated, their sides contiguous, their organs
of micturition reciprocally rendered invisible by manual
circumposition, their gazes, first Bloom’s, then Stephen’s, elevated to
the projected luminous and semiluminous shadow.
Similarly?
The trajectories of their, first sequent, then simultaneous, urinations
were dissimilar: Bloom’s longer, less irruent, in the incomplete form
of the bifurcated penultimate alphabetical letter, who in his ultimate
year at High School (1880) had been capable of attaining the point of
greatest altitude against the whole concurrent strength of the
institution, 210 scholars: Stephen’s higher, more sibilant, who in the
ultimate hours of the previous day had augmented by diuretic
consumption an insistent vesical pressure.
What different problems presented themselves to each concerning the
invisible audible collateral organ of the other?
To Bloom: the problems of irritability, tumescence, rigidity,
reactivity, dimension, sanitariness, pilosity.
To Stephen: the problem of the sacerdotal integrity of Jesus
circumcised (1 January, holiday of obligation to hear mass and abstain
from unnecessary servile work) and the problem as to whether the divine
prepuce, the carnal bridal ring of the holy Roman catholic apostolic
church, conserved in Calcata, were deserving of simple hyperduly or of
the fourth degree of latria accorded to the abscission of such divine
excrescences as hair and toenails.
What celestial sign was by both simultaneously observed?
A star precipitated with great apparent velocity across the firmament
from Vega in the Lyre above the zenith beyond the stargroup of the
Tress of Berenice towards the zodiacal sign of Leo.
How did the centripetal remainer afford egress to the centrifugal
departer?
By inserting the barrel of an arruginated male key in the hole of an
unstable female lock, obtaining a purchase on the bow of the key and
turning its wards from right to left, withdrawing a bolt from its
staple, pulling inward spasmodically an obsolescent unhinged door and
revealing an aperture for free egress and free ingress.
How did they take leave, one of the other, in separation?
Standing perpendicular at the same door and on different sides of its
base, the lines of their valedictory arms, meeting at any point and
forming any angle less than the sum of two right angles.
What sound accompanied the union of their tangent, the disunion of
their (respectively) centrifugal and centripetal hands?
The sound of the peal of the hour of the night by the chime of the
bells in the church of Saint George.
What echoes of that sound were by both and each heard?
By Stephen:
     Liliata rutilantium. Turma circumdet.
     Iubilantium te virginum. Chorus excipiat.
By Bloom:
     Heigho, heigho,
     Heigho, heigho.
Where were the several members of the company which with Bloom that day
at the bidding of that peal had travelled from Sandymount in the south
to Glasnevin in the north?
Martin Cunningham (in bed), Jack Power (in bed), Simon Dedalus (in
bed), Ned Lambert (in bed), Tom Kernan (in bed), Joe Hynes (in bed),
John Henry Menton (in bed), Bernard Corrigan (in bed), Patsy Dignam (in
bed), Paddy Dignam (in the grave).
Alone, what did Bloom hear?
The double reverberation of retreating feet on the heavenborn earth,
the double vibration of a jew’s harp in the resonant lane.
Alone, what did Bloom feel?
The cold of interstellar space, thousands of degrees below freezing
point or the absolute zero of Fahrenheit, Centigrade or Réaumur: the
incipient intimations of proximate dawn.
Of what did bellchime and handtouch and footstep and lonechill remind
him?
Of companions now in various manners in different places defunct: Percy
Apjohn (killed in action, Modder River), Philip Gilligan (phthisis,
Jervis Street hospital), Matthew F. Kane (accidental drowning, Dublin
Bay), Philip Moisel (pyemia, Heytesbury street), Michael Hart
(phthisis, Mater Misericordiae hospital), Patrick Dignam (apoplexy,
Sandymount).
What prospect of what phenomena inclined him to remain?
The disparition of three final stars, the diffusion of daybreak, the
apparition of a new solar disk.
Had he ever been a spectator of those phenomena?
Once, in 1887, after a protracted performance of charades in the house
of Luke Doyle, Kimmage, he had awaited with patience the apparition of
the diurnal phenomenon, seated on a wall, his gaze turned in the
direction of Mizrach, the east.
He remembered the initial paraphenomena?
More active air, a matutinal distant cock, ecclesiastical clocks at
various points, avine music, the isolated tread of an early wayfarer,
the visible diffusion of the light of an invisible luminous body, the
first golden limb of the resurgent sun perceptible low on the horizon.
Did he remain?
With deep inspiration he returned, retraversing the garden, reentering
the passage, reclosing the door. With brief suspiration he reassumed
the candle, reascended the stairs, reapproached the door of the front
room, hallfloor, and reentered.
What suddenly arrested his ingress?
The right temporal lobe of the hollow sphere of his cranium came into
contact with a solid timber angle where, an infinitesimal but sensible
fraction of a second later, a painful sensation was located in
consequence of antecedent sensations transmitted and registered.
Describe the alterations effected in the disposition of the articles of
furniture.
A sofa upholstered in prune plush had been translocated from opposite
the door to the ingleside near the compactly furled Union Jack (an
alteration which he had frequently intended to execute): the blue and
white checker inlaid majolicatopped table had been placed opposite the
door in the place vacated by the prune plush sofa: the walnut sideboard
(a projecting angle of which had momentarily arrested his ingress) had
been moved from its position beside the door to a more advantageous but
more perilous position in front of the door: two chairs had been moved
from right and left of the ingleside to the position originally
occupied by the blue and white checker inlaid majolicatopped table.
Describe them.
One: a squat stuffed easychair, with stout arms extended and back
slanted to the rere, which, repelled in recoil, had then upturned an
irregular fringe of a rectangular rug and now displayed on its amply
upholstered seat a centralised diffusing and diminishing
discolouration. The other: a slender splayfoot chair of glossy cane
curves, placed directly opposite the former, its frame from top to seat
and from seat to base being varnished dark brown, its seat being a
bright circle of white plaited rush.
What significances attached to these two chairs?
Significances of similitude, of posture, of symbolism, of
circumstantial evidence, of testimonial supermanence.
What occupied the position originally occupied by the sideboard?
A vertical piano (Cadby) with exposed keyboard, its closed coffin
supporting a pair of long yellow ladies’ gloves and an emerald ashtray
containing four consumed matches, a partly consumed cigarette and two
discoloured ends of cigarettes, its musicrest supporting the music in
the key of G natural for voice and piano of _Love’s Old Sweet Song_
(words by G. Clifton Bingham, composed by J. L. Molloy, sung by Madam
Antoinette Sterling) open at the last page with the final indications
_ad libitum, forte_, pedal, _animato_, sustained pedal, _ritirando_,
close.
With what sensations did Bloom contemplate in rotation these objects?
With strain, elevating a candlestick: with pain, feeling on his right
temple a contused tumescence: with attention, focussing his gaze on a
large dull passive and a slender bright active: with solicitation,
bending and downturning the upturned rugfringe: with amusement,
remembering Dr Malachi Mulligan’s scheme of colour containing the
gradation of green: with pleasure, repeating the words and antecedent
act and perceiving through various channels of internal sensibility the
consequent and concomitant tepid pleasant diffusion of gradual
discolouration.
His next proceeding?
From an open box on the majolicatopped table he extracted a black
diminutive cone, one inch in height, placed it on its circular base on
a small tin plate, placed his candlestick on the right corner of the
mantelpiece, produced from his waistcoat a folded page of prospectus
(illustrated) entitled Agendath Netaim, unfolded the same, examined it
superficially, rolled it into a thin cylinder, ignited it in the
candleflame, applied it when ignited to the apex of the cone till the
latter reached the stage of rutilance, placed the cylinder in the basin
of the candlestick disposing its unconsumed part in such a manner as to
facilitate total combustion.
What followed this operation?
The truncated conical crater summit of the diminutive volcano emitted a
vertical and serpentine fume redolent of aromatic oriental incense.
What homothetic objects, other than the candlestick, stood on the
mantelpiece?
A timepiece of striated Connemara marble, stopped at the hour of 4.46
a.m. on the 21 March 1896, matrimonial gift of Matthew Dillon: a dwarf
tree of glacial arborescence under a transparent bellshade, matrimonial
gift of Luke and Caroline Doyle: an embalmed owl, matrimonial gift of
Alderman John Hooper.
What interchanges of looks took place between these three objects and
Bloom?
In the mirror of the giltbordered pierglass the undecorated back of the
dwarf tree regarded the upright back of the embalmed owl. Before the
mirror the matrimonial gift of Alderman John Hooper with a clear
melancholy wise bright motionless compassionate gaze regarded Bloom
while Bloom with obscure tranquil profound motionless compassionated
gaze regarded the matrimonial gift of Luke and Caroline Doyle.
What composite asymmetrical image in the mirror then attracted his
attention?
The image of a solitary (ipsorelative) mutable (aliorelative) man.
Why solitary (ipsorelative)?
     Brothers and sisters had he none.
     Yet that man’s father was his grandfather’s son.
Why mutable (aliorelative)?
From infancy to maturity he had resembled his maternal procreatrix.
From maturity to senility he would increasingly resemble his paternal
procreator.
What final visual impression was communicated to him by the mirror?
The optical reflection of several inverted volumes improperly arranged
and not in the order of their common letters with scintillating titles
on the two bookshelves opposite.
Catalogue these books.
_Thom’s Dublin Post Office Directory_, 1886.
Denis Florence M’Carthy’s _Poetical Works_ (copper beechleaf bookmark
at p. 5).
Shakespeare’s _Works_ (dark crimson morocco, goldtooled).
_The Useful Ready Reckoner_ (brown cloth).
_The Secret History of the Court of Charles II_ (red cloth, tooled
binding).
_The Child’s Guide_ (blue cloth).
_The Beauties of Killarney_ (wrappers).
_When We Were Boys_ by William O’Brien M. P. (green cloth, slightly
faded, envelope bookmark at p. 217).
_Thoughts from Spinoza_ (maroon leather).
_The Story of the Heavens_ by Sir Robert Ball (blue cloth).
Ellis’s _Three Trips to Madagascar_ (brown cloth, title obliterated).
_The Stark-Munro Letters_ by A. Conan Doyle, property of the City of
Dublin Public Library, 106 Capel street, lent 21 May (Whitsun Eve)
1904, due 4 June 1904, 13 days overdue (black cloth binding, bearing
white letternumber ticket).
_Voyages in China_ by “Viator” (recovered with brown paper, red ink
title).
_Philosophy of the Talmud_ (sewn pamphlet).
Lockhart’s _Life of Napoleon_ (cover wanting, marginal annotations,
minimising victories, aggrandising defeats of the protagonist).
_Soll und Haben_ by Gustav Freytag (black boards, Gothic characters,
cigarette coupon bookmark at p. 24).
Hozier’s _History of the Russo-Turkish War_ (brown cloth, 2 volumes,
with gummed label, Garrison Library, Governor’s Parade, Gibraltar, on
verso of cover).
_Laurence Bloomfield in Ireland_ by William Allingham (second edition,
green cloth, gilt trefoil design, previous owner’s name on recto of
flyleaf erased).
_A Handbook of Astronomy_ (cover, brown leather, detached, 5 plates,
antique letterpress long primer, author’s footnotes nonpareil, marginal
clues brevier, captions small pica).
_The Hidden Life of Christ_ (black boards).
_In the Track of the Sun_ (yellow cloth, titlepage missing, recurrent
title intestation).
_Physical Strength and How to Obtain It_ by Eugen Sandow (red cloth).
_Short but yet Plain Elements of Geometry_ written in French by F.
Ignat. Pardies and rendered into Engliſh by John Harris D. D. London,
printed for R. Knaplock at the Biſhop’s Head, MDCCXI, with dedicatory
epiſtle to his worthy friend Charles Cox, eſquire, Member of Parliament
for the burgh of Southwark and having ink calligraphed statement on the
flyleaf certifying that the book was the property of Michael Gallagher,
dated this 10th day of May 1822 and requeſting the perſon who should
find it, if the book should be loſt or go aſtray, to reſtore it to
Michael Gallagher, carpenter, Dufery Gate, Enniſcorthy, county Wicklow,
the fineſt place in the world.
What reflections occupied his mind during the process of reversion of
the inverted volumes?
The necessity of order, a place for everything and everything in its
place: the deficient appreciation of literature possessed by females:
the incongruity of an apple incuneated in a tumbler and of an umbrella
inclined in a closestool: the insecurity of hiding any secret document
behind, beneath or between the pages of a book.
Which volume was the largest in bulk?
Hozier’s _History of the Russo-Turkish War._
What among other data did the second volume of the work in question
contain?
The name of a decisive battle (forgotten), frequently remembered by a
decisive officer, major Brian Cooper Tweedy (remembered).
Why, firstly and secondly, did he not consult the work in question?
Firstly, in order to exercise mnemotechnic: secondly, because after an
interval of amnesia, when, seated at the central table, about to
consult the work in question, he remembered by mnemotechnic the name of
the military engagement, Plevna.
What caused him consolation in his sitting posture?
The candour, nudity, pose, tranquility, youth, grace, sex, counsel of a
statue erect in the centre of the table, an image of Narcissus
purchased by auction from P. A. Wren, 9 Bachelor’s Walk.
What caused him irritation in his sitting posture?
Inhibitory pressure of collar (size 17) and waistcoat (5 buttons), two
articles of clothing superfluous in the costume of mature males and
inelastic to alterations of mass by expansion.
How was the irritation allayed?
He removed his collar, with contained black necktie and collapsible
stud, from his neck to a position on the left of the table. He
unbuttoned successively in reversed direction waistcoat, trousers,
shirt and vest along the medial line of irregular incrispated black
hairs extending in triangular convergence from the pelvic basin over
the circumference of the abdomen and umbilicular fossicle along the
medial line of nodes to the intersection of the sixth pectoral
vertebrae, thence produced both ways at right angles and terminating in
circles described about two equidistant points, right and left, on the
summits of the mammary prominences. He unbraced successively each of
six minus one braced trouser buttons, arranged in pairs, of which one
incomplete.
What involuntary actions followed?
He compressed between 2 fingers the flesh circumjacent to a cicatrice
in the left infracostal region below the diaphragm resulting from a
sting inflicted 2 weeks and 3 days previously (23 May 1904) by a bee.
He scratched imprecisely with his right hand, though insensible of
prurition, various points and surfaces of his partly exposed, wholly
abluted skin. He inserted his left hand into the left lower pocket of
his waistcoat and extracted and replaced a silver coin (1 shilling),
placed there (presumably) on the occasion (17 October 1903) of the
interment of Mrs Emily Sinico, Sydney Parade.
Compile the budget for 16 June 1904.
     Debit
                                        £. s. d.
     1 Pork kidney                      0—0—3
     1 Copy Freeman’s Journal           0—0—1
     1 Bath and Gratification           0—1—6
     Tramfare                           0—0—1
     1 In Memoriam Patrick Dignam       0—5—0
     2 Banbury cakes                    0—0—1
     1 Lunch                            0—0—7
     1 Renewal fee for book             0—1—0
     1 Packet Notepaper and Envelopes   0—0—2
     1 Dinner and Gratification         0—2—0
     1 Postal Order and Stamp           0—2—8
     Tramfare                           0—0—1
     1 Pig’s Foot                       0—0—4
     1 Sheep’s Trotter                  0—0—3
     1 Cake Fry’s Plain Chocolate       0—0—1
     1 Square Soda Bread                0—0—4
     1 Coffee and Bun                   0—0—4
     Loan (Stephen Dedalus) refunded    1—7—0
        BALANCE                         0—16—6
                                        —————
                                        2—19—3
     Credit
                                        £. s. d.
     Cash in hand                       0—4—9
     Commission recd. Freeman’s Journal 1—7—6
     Loan (Stephen Dedalus)             1—7—0
                                        —————
                                        2—19—3
Did the process of divestiture continue?
Did the process of divestiture continue?
Sensible of a benignant persistent ache in his footsoles he extended
his foot to one side and observed the creases, protuberances and
salient points caused by foot pressure in the course of walking
repeatedly in several different directions, then, inclined, he disnoded
the laceknots, unhooked and loosened the laces, took off each of his
two boots for the second time, detached the partially moistened right
sock through the fore part of which the nail of his great toe had again
effracted, raised his right foot and, having unhooked a purple elastic
sock suspender, took off his right sock, placed his unclothed right
foot on the margin of the seat of his chair, picked at and gently
lacerated the protruding part of the great toenail, raised the part
lacerated to his nostrils and inhaled the odour of the quick, then,
with satisfaction, threw away the lacerated ungual fragment.
Why with satisfaction?
Because the odour inhaled corresponded to other odours inhaled of other
ungual fragments, picked and lacerated by Master Bloom, pupil of Mrs
Ellis’s juvenile school, patiently each night in the act of brief
genuflection and nocturnal prayer and ambitious meditation.
In what ultimate ambition had all concurrent and consecutive ambitions
now coalesced?
Not to inherit by right of primogeniture, gavelkind or borough English,
or possess in perpetuity an extensive demesne of a sufficient number of
acres, roods and perches, statute land measure (valuation £ 42), of
grazing turbary surrounding a baronial hall with gatelodge and carriage
drive nor, on the other hand, a terracehouse or semidetached villa,
described as _Rus in Urbe_ or _Qui si sana_, but to purchase by private
treaty in fee simple a thatched bungalowshaped 2 storey dwellinghouse
of southerly aspect, surmounted by vane and lightning conductor,
connected with the earth, with porch covered by parasitic plants (ivy
or Virginia creeper), halldoor, olive green, with smart carriage finish
and neat doorbrasses, stucco front with gilt tracery at eaves and
gable, rising, if possible, upon a gentle eminence with agreeable
prospect from balcony with stone pillar parapet over unoccupied and
unoccupyable interjacent pastures and standing in 5 or 6 acres of its
own ground, at such a distance from the nearest public thoroughfare as
to render its houselights visible at night above and through a quickset
hornbeam hedge of topiary cutting, situate at a given point not less
than 1 statute mile from the periphery of the metropolis, within a time
limit of not more than 15 minutes from tram or train line (e.g.,
Dundrum, south, or Sutton, north, both localities equally reported by
trial to resemble the terrestrial poles in being favourable climates
for phthisical subjects), the premises to be held under feefarm grant,
lease 999 years, the messuage to consist of 1 drawingroom with
baywindow (2 lancets), thermometer affixed, 1 sittingroom, 4 bedrooms,
2 servants’ rooms, tiled kitchen with close range and scullery, lounge
hall fitted with linen wallpresses, fumed oak sectional bookcase
containing the Encyclopaedia Britannica and New Century Dictionary,
transverse obsolete medieval and oriental weapons, dinner gong,
alabaster lamp, bowl pendant, vulcanite automatic telephone receiver
with adjacent directory, handtufted Axminster carpet with cream ground
and trellis border, loo table with pillar and claw legs, hearth with
massive firebrasses and ormolu mantel chronometer clock, guaranteed
timekeeper with cathedral chime, barometer with hygrographic chart,
comfortable lounge settees and corner fitments, upholstered in ruby
plush with good springing and sunk centre, three banner Japanese screen
and cuspidors (club style, rich winecoloured leather, gloss renewable
with a minimum of labour by use of linseed oil and vinegar) and
pyramidically prismatic central chandelier lustre, bentwood perch with
fingertame parrot (expurgated language), embossed mural paper at 10/-
per dozen with transverse swags of carmine floral design and top crown
frieze, staircase, three continuous flights at successive right angles,
of varnished cleargrained oak, treads and risers, newel, balusters and
handrail, with steppedup panel dado, dressed with camphorated wax:
bathroom, hot and cold supply, reclining and shower: water closet on
mezzanine provided with opaque singlepane oblong window, tipup seat,
bracket lamp, brass tierod and brace, armrests, footstool and artistic
oleograph on inner face of door: ditto, plain: servants’ apartments
with separate sanitary and hygienic necessaries for cook, general and
betweenmaid (salary, rising by biennial unearned increments of £ 2,
with comprehensive fidelity insurance, annual bonus (£ 1) and retiring
allowance (based on the 65 system) after 30 years’ service), pantry,
buttery, larder, refrigerator, outoffices, coal and wood cellarage with
winebin (still and sparkling vintages) for distinguished guests, if
entertained to dinner (evening dress), carbon monoxide gas supply
throughout.
What additional attractions might the grounds contain?
As addenda, a tennis and fives court, a shrubbery, a glass summerhouse
with tropical palms, equipped in the best botanical manner, a rockery
with waterspray, a beehive arranged on humane principles, oval
flowerbeds in rectangular grassplots set with eccentric ellipses of
scarlet and chrome tulips, blue scillas, crocuses, polyanthus, sweet
William, sweet pea, lily of the valley (bulbs obtainable from sir James
W. Mackey (Limited) wholesale and retail seed and bulb merchants and
nurserymen, agents for chemical manures, 23 Sackville street, upper),
an orchard, kitchen garden and vinery, protected against illegal
trespassers by glasstopped mural enclosures, a lumbershed with padlock
for various inventoried implements.
As?
Eeltraps, lobsterpots, fishingrods, hatchet, steelyard, grindstone,
clodcrusher, swatheturner, carriagesack, telescope ladder, 10 tooth
rake, washing clogs, haytedder, tumbling rake, billhook, paintpot,
brush, hoe and so on.
What improvements might be subsequently introduced?
A rabbitry and fowlrun, a dovecote, a botanical conservatory, 2
hammocks (lady’s and gentleman’s), a sundial shaded and sheltered by
laburnum or lilac trees, an exotically harmonically accorded Japanese
tinkle gatebell affixed to left lateral gatepost, a capacious
waterbutt, a lawnmower with side delivery and grassbox, a lawnsprinkler
with hydraulic hose.
What facilities of transit were desirable?
When citybound frequent connection by train or tram from their
respective intermediate station or terminal. When countrybound
velocipedes, a chainless freewheel roadster cycle with side basketcar
attached, or draught conveyance, a donkey with wicker trap or smart
phaeton with good working solidungular cob (roan gelding, 14 h).
What might be the name of this erigible or erected residence?
Bloom Cottage. Saint Leopold’s. Flowerville.
Could Bloom of 7 Eccles street foresee Bloom of Flowerville?
In loose allwool garments with Harris tweed cap, price 8/6, and useful
garden boots with elastic gussets and wateringcan, planting aligned
young firtrees, syringing, pruning, staking, sowing hayseed, trundling
a weedladen wheelbarrow without excessive fatigue at sunset amid the
scent of newmown hay, ameliorating the soil, multiplying wisdom,
achieving longevity.
What syllabus of intellectual pursuits was simultaneously possible?
Snapshot photography, comparative study of religions, folklore relative
to various amatory and superstitious practices, contemplation of the
celestial constellations.
What lighter recreations?
Outdoor: garden and fieldwork, cycling on level macadamised causeways,
ascents of moderately high hills, natation in secluded fresh water and
unmolested river boating in secure wherry or light curricle with kedge
anchor on reaches free from weirs and rapids (period of estivation),
vespertinal perambulation or equestrian circumprocession with
inspection of sterile landscape and contrastingly agreeable cottagers’
fires of smoking peat turves (period of hibernation). Indoor:
discussion in tepid security of unsolved historical and criminal
problems: lecture of unexpurgated exotic erotic masterpieces: house
carpentry with toolbox containing hammer, awl, nails, screws, tintacks,
gimlet, tweezers, bullnose plane and turnscrew.
Might he become a gentleman farmer of field produce and live stock?
Not impossibly, with 1 or 2 stripper cows, 1 pike of upland hay and
requisite farming implements, e.g., an end-to-end churn, a turnip
pulper etc.
What would be his civic functions and social status among the county
families and landed gentry?
Arranged successively in ascending powers of hierarchical order, that
of gardener, groundsman, cultivator, breeder, and at the zenith of his
career, resident magistrate or justice of the peace with a family crest
and coat of arms and appropriate classical motto _(Semper paratus_),
duly recorded in the court directory (Bloom, Leopold P., M. P., P. C.,
K. P., L. L. D. (_honoris causa_), Bloomville, Dundrum) and mentioned
in court and fashionable intelligence (Mr and Mrs Leopold Bloom have
left Kingstown for England).
What course of action did he outline for himself in such capacity?
A course that lay between undue clemency and excessive rigour: the
dispensation in a heterogeneous society of arbitrary classes,
incessantly rearranged in terms of greater and lesser social
inequality, of unbiassed homogeneous indisputable justice, tempered
with mitigants of the widest possible latitude but exactable to the
uttermost farthing with confiscation of estate, real and personal, to
the crown. Loyal to the highest constituted power in the land, actuated
by an innate love of rectitude his aims would be the strict maintenance
of public order, the repression of many abuses though not of all
simultaneously (every measure of reform or retrenchment being a
preliminary solution to be contained by fluxion in the final solution),
the upholding of the letter of the law (common, statute and law
merchant) against all traversers in covin and trespassers acting in
contravention of bylaws and regulations, all resuscitators (by trespass
and petty larceny of kindlings) of venville rights, obsolete by
desuetude, all orotund instigators of international persecution, all
perpetuators of international animosities, all menial molestors of
domestic conviviality, all recalcitrant violators of domestic
connubiality.
Prove that he had loved rectitude from his earliest youth.
To Master Percy Apjohn at High School in 1880 he had divulged his
disbelief in the tenets of the Irish (protestant) church (to which his
father Rudolf Virag (later Rudolph Bloom) had been converted from the
Israelitic faith and communion in 1865 by the Society for promoting
Christianity among the jews) subsequently abjured by him in favour of
Roman catholicism at the epoch of and with a view to his matrimony in
1888. To Daniel Magrane and Francis Wade in 1882 during a juvenile
friendship (terminated by the premature emigration of the former) he
had advocated during nocturnal perambulations the political theory of
colonial (e.g. Canadian) expansion and the evolutionary theories of
Charles Darwin, expounded in _The Descent of Man_ and _The Origin of
Species_. In 1885 he had publicly expressed his adherence to the
collective and national economic programme advocated by James Fintan
Lalor, John Fisher Murray, John Mitchel, J. F. X. O’Brien and others,
the agrarian policy of Michael Davitt, the constitutional agitation of
Charles Stewart Parnell (M. P. for Cork City), the programme of peace,
retrenchment and reform of William Ewart Gladstone (M. P. for
Midlothian, N. B.) and, in support of his political convictions, had
climbed up into a secure position amid the ramifications of a tree on
Northumberland road to see the entrance (2 February 1888) into the
capital of a demonstrative torchlight procession of 20,000
torchbearers, divided into 120 trade corporations, bearing 2000 torches
in escort of the marquess of Ripon and (honest) John Morley.
How much and how did he propose to pay for this country residence?
As per prospectus of the Industrious Foreign Acclimatised Nationalised
Friendly Stateaided Building Society (incorporated 1874), a maximum of
£ 60 per annum, being 1/6 of an assured income, derived from giltedged
securities, representing at 5 % simple interest on capital of £ 1200
(estimate of price at 20 years’ purchase), of which 1/3 to be paid on
acquisition and the balance in the form of annual rent, viz. £ 800 plus
2 1/2 % interest on the same, repayable quarterly in equal annual
instalments until extinction by amortisation of loan advanced for
purchase within a period of 20 years, amounting to an annual rental of
£ 64, headrent included, the titledeeds to remain in possession of the
lender or lenders with a saving clause envisaging forced sale,
foreclosure and mutual compensation in the event of protracted failure
to pay the terms assigned, otherwise the messuage to become the
absolute property of the tenant occupier upon expiry of the period of
years stipulated.
What rapid but insecure means to opulence might facilitate immediate
purchase?
A private wireless telegraph which would transmit by dot and dash
system the result of a national equine handicap (flat or steeplechase)
of 1 or more miles and furlongs won by an outsider at odds of 50 to 1
at 3 hr 8 m p.m. at Ascot (Greenwich time), the message being received
and available for betting purposes in Dublin at 2.59 p.m. (Dunsink
time). The unexpected discovery of an object of great monetary value
(precious stone, valuable adhesive or impressed postage stamps (7
schilling, mauve, imperforate, Hamburg, 1866: 4 pence, rose, blue
paper, perforate, Great Britain, 1855: 1 franc, stone, official,
rouletted, diagonal surcharge, Luxemburg, 1878), antique dynastical
ring, unique relic) in unusual repositories or by unusual means: from
the air (dropped by an eagle in flight), by fire (amid the carbonised
remains of an incendiated edifice), in the sea (amid flotsam, jetsam,
lagan and derelict), on earth (in the gizzard of a comestible fowl). A
Spanish prisoner’s donation of a distant treasure of valuables or
specie or bullion lodged with a solvent banking corporation 100 years
previously at 5% compound interest of the collective worth of £
5,000,000 stg (five million pounds sterling). A contract with an
inconsiderate contractee for the delivery of 32 consignments of some
given commodity in consideration of cash payment on delivery per
delivery at the initial rate of 1/4d to be increased constantly in the
geometrical progression of 2 (1/4d, 1/2d, 1d, 2d, 4d, 8d, 1s 4d, 2s 8d
to 32 terms). A prepared scheme based on a study of the laws of
probability to break the bank at Monte Carlo. A solution of the secular
problem of the quadrature of the circle, government premium £ 1,000,000
sterling.
Was vast wealth acquirable through industrial channels?
The reclamation of dunams of waste arenary soil, proposed in the
prospectus of Agendath Netaim, Bleibtreustrasse, Berlin, W. 15, by the
cultivation of orange plantations and melonfields and reafforestation.
The utilisation of waste paper, fells of sewer rodents, human excrement
possessing chemical properties, in view of the vast production of the
first, vast number of the second and immense quantity of the third,
every normal human being of average vitality and appetite producing
annually, cancelling byproducts of water, a sum total of 80 lbs. (mixed
animal and vegetable diet), to be multiplied by 4,386,035, the total
population of Ireland according to census returns of 1901.
Were there schemes of wider scope?
A scheme to be formulated and submitted for approval to the harbour
commissioners for the exploitation of white coal (hydraulic power),
obtained by hydroelectric plant at peak of tide at Dublin bar or at
head of water at Poulaphouca or Powerscourt or catchment basins of main
streams for the economic production of 500,000 W. H. P. of electricity.
A scheme to enclose the peninsular delta of the North Bull at
Dollymount and erect on the space of the foreland, used for golf links
and rifle ranges, an asphalted esplanade with casinos, booths, shooting
galleries, hotels, boardinghouses, readingrooms, establishments for
mixed bathing. A scheme for the use of dogvans and goatvans for the
delivery of early morning milk. A scheme for the development of Irish
tourist traffic in and around Dublin by means of petrolpropelled
riverboats, plying in the fluvial fairway between Island bridge and
Ringsend, charabancs, narrow gauge local railways, and pleasure
steamers for coastwise navigation (10/- per person per day, guide
(trilingual) included). A scheme for the repristination of passenger
and goods traffics over Irish waterways, when freed from weedbeds. A
scheme to connect by tramline the Cattle Market (North Circular road
and Prussia street) with the quays (Sheriff street, lower, and East
Wall), parallel with the Link line railway laid (in conjunction with
the Great Southern and Western railway line) between the cattle park,
Liffey junction, and terminus of Midland Great Western Railway 43 to 45
North Wall, in proximity to the terminal stations or Dublin branches of
Great Central Railway, Midland Railway of England, City of Dublin Steam
Packet Company, Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway Company, Dublin and
Glasgow Steam Packet Company, Glasgow, Dublin and Londonderry Steam
Packet Company (Laird line), British and Irish Steam Packet Company,
Dublin and Morecambe Steamers, London and North Western Railway
Company, Dublin Port and Docks Board Landing Sheds and transit sheds of
Palgrave, Murphy and Company, steamship owners, agents for steamers
from Mediterranean, Spain, Portugal, France, Belgium and Holland and
for Liverpool Underwriters’ Association, the cost of acquired rolling
stock for animal transport and of additional mileage operated by the
Dublin United Tramways Company, limited, to be covered by graziers’
fees.
Positing what protasis would the contraction for such several schemes
become a natural and necessary apodosis?
Given a guarantee equal to the sum sought, the support, by deed of gift
and transfer vouchers during donor’s lifetime or by bequest after
donor’s painless extinction, of eminent financiers (Blum Pasha,
Rothschild, Guggenheim, Hirsch, Montefiore, Morgan, Rockefeller)
possessing fortunes in 6 figures, amassed during a successful life, and
joining capital with opportunity the thing required was done.
What eventuality would render him independent of such wealth?
The independent discovery of a goldseam of inexhaustible ore.
For what reason did he meditate on schemes so difficult of realisation?
It was one of his axioms that similar meditations or the automatic
relation to himself of a narrative concerning himself or tranquil
recollection of the past when practised habitually before retiring for
the night alleviated fatigue and produced as a result sound repose and
renovated vitality.
His justifications?
As a physicist he had learned that of the 70 years of complete human
life at least 2/7, viz. 20 years are passed in sleep. As a philosopher
he knew that at the termination of any allotted life only an
infinitesimal part of any person’s desires has been realised. As a
physiologist he believed in the artificial placation of malignant
agencies chiefly operative during somnolence.
What did he fear?
The committal of homicide or suicide during sleep by an aberration of
the light of reason, the incommensurable categorical intelligence
situated in the cerebral convolutions.
What were habitually his final meditations?
Of some one sole unique advertisement to cause passers to stop in
wonder, a poster novelty, with all extraneous accretions excluded,
reduced to its simplest and most efficient terms not exceeding the span
of casual vision and congruous with the velocity of modern life.
What did the first drawer unlocked contain?
A Vere Foster’s handwriting copybook, property of Milly (Millicent)
Bloom, certain pages of which bore diagram drawings, marked _Papli_,
which showed a large globular head with 5 hairs erect, 2 eyes in
profile, the trunk full front with 3 large buttons, 1 triangular foot:
2 fading photographs of queen Alexandra of England and of Maud
Branscombe, actress and professional beauty: a Yuletide card, bearing
on it a pictorial representation of a parasitic plant, the legend
_Mizpah_, the date Xmas 1892, the name of the senders: from Mr + Mrs M.
Comerford, the versicle: _May this Yuletide bring to thee, Joy and
peace and welcome glee_: a butt of red partly liquefied sealing wax,
obtained from the stores department of Messrs Hely’s, Ltd., 89, 90, and
91 Dame street: a box containing the remainder of a gross of gilt “J”
pennibs, obtained from same department of same firm: an old sandglass
which rolled containing sand which rolled: a sealed prophecy (never
unsealed) written by Leopold Bloom in 1886 concerning the consequences
of the passing into law of William Ewart Gladstone’s Home Rule bill of
1886 (never passed into law): a bazaar ticket, No 2004, of S. Kevin’s
Charity Fair, price 6d, 100 prizes: an infantile epistle, dated, small
em monday, reading: capital pee Papli comma capital aitch How are you
note of interrogation capital eye I am very well full stop new
paragraph signature with flourishes capital em Milly no stop: a cameo
brooch, property of Ellen Bloom (born Higgins), deceased: a cameo
scarfpin, property of Rudolph Bloom (born Virag), deceased: 3
typewritten letters, addressee, Henry Flower, c/o. P. O. Westland Row,
addresser, Martha Clifford, c/o. P. O. Dolphin’s Barn: the
transliterated name and address of the addresser of the 3 letters in
reversed alphabetic boustrophedonic punctated quadrilinear cryptogram
(vowels suppressed) N. IGS./WI. UU. OX/W. OKS. MH/Y. IM: a press
cutting from an English weekly periodical _Modern Society_, subject
corporal chastisement in girls’ schools: a pink ribbon which had
festooned an Easter egg in the year 1899: two partly uncoiled rubber
preservatives with reserve pockets, purchased by post from Box 32, P.
O., Charing Cross, London, W. C.: 1 pack of 1 dozen creamlaid envelopes
and feintruled notepaper, watermarked, now reduced by 3: some assorted
Austrian-Hungarian coins: 2 coupons of the Royal and Privileged
Hungarian Lottery: a lowpower magnifying glass: 2 erotic photocards
showing a) buccal coition between nude senorita (rere presentation,
superior position) and nude torero (fore presentation, inferior
position) b) anal violation by male religious (fully clothed, eyes
abject) of female religious (partly clothed, eyes direct), purchased by
post from Box 32, P. O., Charing Cross, London, W. C.: a press cutting
of recipe for renovation of old tan boots: a 1d adhesive stamp,
lavender, of the reign of Queen Victoria: a chart of the measurements
of Leopold Bloom compiled before, during and after 2 months’
consecutive use of Sandow-Whiteley’s pulley exerciser (men’s 15/-,
athlete’s 20/-) viz. chest 28 in and 29 1/2 in, biceps 9 in and 10 in,
forearm 8 1/2 in and 9 in, thigh 10 in and 12 in, calf 11 in and 12 in:
1 prospectus of The Wonderworker, the world’s greatest remedy for
rectal complaints, direct from Wonderworker, Coventry House, South
Place, London E C, addressed (erroneously) to Mrs L. Bloom with brief
accompanying note commencing (erroneously): Dear Madam.
Quote the textual terms in which the prospectus claimed advantages for
this thaumaturgic remedy.
It heals and soothes while you sleep, in case of trouble in breaking
wind, assists nature in the most formidable way, insuring instant
relief in discharge of gases, keeping parts clean and free natural
action, an initial outlay of 7/6 making a new man of you and life worth
living. Ladies find Wonderworker especially useful, a pleasant surprise
when they note delightful result like a cool drink of fresh spring
water on a sultry summer’s day. Recommend it to your lady and gentlemen
friends, lasts a lifetime. Insert long round end. Wonderworker.
Were there testimonials?
Numerous. From clergyman, British naval officer, wellknown author, city
man, hospital nurse, lady, mother of five, absentminded beggar.
How did absentminded beggar’s concluding testimonial conclude?
What a pity the government did not supply our men with wonderworkers
during the South African campaign! What a relief it would have been!
What object did Bloom add to this collection of objects?
A 4th typewritten letter received by Henry Flower (let H. F. be L. B.)
from Martha Clifford (find M. C.).
What pleasant reflection accompanied this action?
The reflection that, apart from the letter in question, his magnetic
face, form and address had been favourably received during the course
of the preceding day by a wife (Mrs Josephine Breen, born Josie
Powell), a nurse, Miss Callan (Christian name unknown), a maid,
Gertrude (Gerty, family name unknown).
What possibility suggested itself?
The possibility of exercising virile power of fascination in the not
immediate future after an expensive repast in a private apartment in
the company of an elegant courtesan, of corporal beauty, moderately
mercenary, variously instructed, a lady by origin.
What did the 2nd drawer contain?
Documents: the birth certificate of Leopold Paula Bloom: an endowment
assurance policy of £ 500 in the Scottish Widows’ Assurance Society,
intestated Millicent (Milly) Bloom, coming into force at 25 years as
with profit policy of £ 430, £ 462-10-0 and £ 500 at 60 years or death,
65 years or death and death, respectively, or with profit policy
(paidup) of £ 299-10-0 together with cash payment of £ 133-10-0, at
option: a bank passbook issued by the Ulster Bank, College Green branch
showing statement of a/c for halfyear ending 31 December 1903, balance
in depositor’s favour: £ 18-14-6 (eighteen pounds, fourteen shillings
and sixpence, sterling), net personalty: certificate of possession of £
900, Canadian 4% (inscribed) government stock (free of stamp duty):
dockets of the Catholic Cemeteries’ (Glasnevin) Committee, relative to
a graveplot purchased: a local press cutting concerning change of name
by deedpoll.
Quote the textual terms of this notice.
I, Rudolph Virag, now resident at no 52 Clanbrassil street, Dublin,
formerly of Szombathely in the kingdom of Hungary, hereby give notice
that I have assumed and intend henceforth upon all occasions and at all
times to be known by the name of Rudolph Bloom.
What other objects relative to Rudolph Bloom (born Virag) were in the
2nd drawer?
An indistinct daguerreotype of Rudolf Virag and his father Leopold
Virag executed in the year 1852 in the portrait atelier of their
(respectively) 1st and 2nd cousin, Stefan Virag of Szesfehervar,
Hungary. An ancient haggadah book in which a pair of hornrimmed convex
spectacles inserted marked the passage of thanksgiving in the ritual
prayers for Pessach (Passover): a photocard of the Queen’s Hotel,
Ennis, proprietor, Rudolph Bloom: an envelope addressed: _To My Dear
Son Leopold_.
What fractions of phrases did the lecture of those five whole words
evoke?
Tomorrow will be a week that I received... it is no use Leopold to be
... with your dear mother... that is not more to stand... to her... all
for me is out... be kind to Athos, Leopold... my dear son... always...
of me... _das Herz... Gott... dein_...
What reminiscences of a human subject suffering from progressive
melancholia did these objects evoke in Bloom?
An old man, widower, unkempt of hair, in bed, with head covered,
sighing: an infirm dog, Athos: aconite, resorted to by increasing doses
of grains and scruples as a palliative of recrudescent neuralgia: the
face in death of a septuagenarian, suicide by poison.
Why did Bloom experience a sentiment of remorse?
Because in immature impatience he had treated with disrespect certain
beliefs and practices.
As?
The prohibition of the use of fleshmeat and milk at one meal: the
hebdomadary symposium of incoordinately abstract, perfervidly concrete
mercantile coexreligionist excompatriots: the circumcision of male
infants: the supernatural character of Judaic scripture: the
ineffability of the tetragrammaton: the sanctity of the sabbath.
How did these beliefs and practices now appear to him?
Not more rational than they had then appeared, not less rational than
other beliefs and practices now appeared.
What first reminiscence had he of Rudolph Bloom (deceased)?
Rudolph Bloom (deceased) narrated to his son Leopold Bloom (aged 6) a
retrospective arrangement of migrations and settlements in and between
Dublin, London, Florence, Milan, Vienna, Budapest, Szombathely with
statements of satisfaction (his grandfather having seen Maria Theresia,
empress of Austria, queen of Hungary), with commercial advice (having
taken care of pence, the pounds having taken care of themselves).
Leopold Bloom (aged 6) had accompanied these narrations by constant
consultation of a geographical map of Europe (political) and by
suggestions for the establishment of affiliated business premises in
the various centres mentioned.
Had time equally but differently obliterated the memory of these
migrations in narrator and listener?
In narrator by the access of years and in consequence of the use of
narcotic toxin: in listener by the access of years and in consequence
of the action of distraction upon vicarious experiences.
What idiosyncracies of the narrator were concomitant products of
amnesia?
Occasionally he ate without having previously removed his hat.
Occasionally he drank voraciously the juice of gooseberry fool from an
inclined plate. Occasionally he removed from his lips the traces of
food by means of a lacerated envelope or other accessible fragment of
paper.
What two phenomena of senescence were more frequent?
The myopic digital calculation of coins, eructation consequent upon
repletion.
What object offered partial consolation for these reminiscences?
The endowment policy, the bank passbook, the certificate of the
possession of scrip.
Reduce Bloom by cross multiplication of reverses of fortune, from which
these supports protected him, and by elimination of all positive values
to a negligible negative irrational unreal quantity.
Successively, in descending helotic order: Poverty: that of the outdoor
hawker of imitation jewellery, the dun for the recovery of bad and
doubtful debts, the poor rate and deputy cess collector. Mendicancy:
that of the fraudulent bankrupt with negligible assets paying 1/4d in
the £, sandwichman, distributor of throwaways, nocturnal vagrant,
insinuating sycophant, maimed sailor, blind stripling, superannuated
bailiff’s man, marfeast, lickplate, spoilsport, pickthank, eccentric
public laughingstock seated on bench of public park under discarded
perforated umbrella. Destitution: the inmate of Old Man’s House (Royal
Hospital), Kilmainham, the inmate of Simpson’s Hospital for reduced but
respectable men permanently disabled by gout or want of sight. Nadir of
misery: the aged impotent disfranchised ratesupported moribund lunatic
pauper.
With which attendant indignities?
The unsympathetic indifference of previously amiable females, the
contempt of muscular males, the acceptance of fragments of bread, the
simulated ignorance of casual acquaintances, the latration of
illegitimate unlicensed vagabond dogs, the infantile discharge of
decomposed vegetable missiles, worth little or nothing, nothing or less
than nothing.
By what could such a situation be precluded?
By decease (change of state): by departure (change of place).
Which preferably?
The latter, by the line of least resistance.
What considerations rendered departure not entirely undesirable?
Constant cohabitation impeding mutual toleration of personal defects.
The habit of independent purchase increasingly cultivated. The
necessity to counteract by impermanent sojourn the permanence of
arrest.
What considerations rendered departure not irrational?
The parties concerned, uniting, had increased and multiplied, which
being done, offspring produced and educed to maturity, the parties, if
not disunited were obliged to reunite for increase and multiplication,
which was absurd, to form by reunion the original couple of uniting
parties, which was impossible.
What considerations rendered departure desirable?
The attractive character of certain localities in Ireland and abroad,
as represented in general geographical maps of polychrome design or in
special ordnance survey charts by employment of scale numerals and
hachures.
In Ireland?
The cliffs of Moher, the windy wilds of Connemara, lough Neagh with
submerged petrified city, the Giant’s Causeway, Fort Camden and Fort
Carlisle, the Golden Vale of Tipperary, the islands of Aran, the
pastures of royal Meath, Brigid’s elm in Kildare, the Queen’s Island
shipyard in Belfast, the Salmon Leap, the lakes of Killarney.
Abroad?
Ceylon (with spicegardens supplying tea to Thomas Kernan, agent for
Pulbrook, Robertson and Co, 2 Mincing Lane, London, E. C., 5 Dame
street, Dublin), Jerusalem, the holy city (with mosque of Omar and gate
of Damascus, goal of aspiration), the straits of Gibraltar (the unique
birthplace of Marion Tweedy), the Parthenon (containing statues of nude
Grecian divinities), the Wall street money market (which controlled
international finance), the Plaza de Toros at La Linea, Spain (where
O’Hara of the Camerons had slain the bull), Niagara (over which no
human being had passed with impunity), the land of the Eskimos (eaters
of soap), the forbidden country of Thibet (from which no traveller
returns), the bay of Naples (to see which was to die), the Dead Sea.
Under what guidance, following what signs?
At sea, septentrional, by night the polestar, located at the point of
intersection of the right line from beta to alpha in Ursa Maior
produced and divided externally at omega and the hypotenuse of the
rightangled triangle formed by the line alpha omega so produced and the
line alpha delta of Ursa Maior. On land, meridional, a bispherical
moon, revealed in imperfect varying phases of lunation through the
posterior interstice of the imperfectly occluded skirt of a carnose
negligent perambulating female, a pillar of the cloud by day.
What public advertisement would divulge the occultation of the
departed?
£ 5 reward, lost, stolen or strayed from his residence 7 Eccles street,
missing gent about 40, answering to the name of Bloom, Leopold (Poldy),
height 5 ft 9 1/2 inches, full build, olive complexion, may have since
grown a beard, when last seen was wearing a black suit. Above sum will
be paid for information leading to his discovery.
What universal binomial denominations would be his as entity and
nonentity?
Assumed by any or known to none. Everyman or Noman.
What tributes his?
Honour and gifts of strangers, the friends of Everyman. A nymph
immortal, beauty, the bride of Noman.
Would the departed never nowhere nohow reappear?
Ever he would wander, selfcompelled, to the extreme limit of his
cometary orbit, beyond the fixed stars and variable suns and telescopic
planets, astronomical waifs and strays, to the extreme boundary of
space, passing from land to land, among peoples, amid events. Somewhere
imperceptibly he would hear and somehow reluctantly, suncompelled, obey
the summons of recall. Whence, disappearing from the constellation of
the Northern Crown he would somehow reappear reborn above delta in the
constellation of Cassiopeia and after incalculable eons of
peregrination return an estranged avenger, a wreaker of justice on
malefactors, a dark crusader, a sleeper awakened, with financial
resources (by supposition) surpassing those of Rothschild or the silver
king.
What would render such return irrational?
“I don’t know, however, what right I have to ask a service of you.”
“You’re the person in the world who has most right,” he answered. “I’ve
given you assurances that I’ve never given any one else.”
The service was that he should go and see her cousin Ralph, who was ill
at the Hôtel de Paris, alone, and be as kind to him as possible. Mr.
Goodwood had never seen him, but he would know who the poor fellow
was; if she was not mistaken Ralph had once invited him to Gardencourt.
Caspar remembered the invitation perfectly, and, though he was not
supposed to be a man of imagination, had enough to put himself in the
place of a poor gentleman who lay dying at a Roman inn. He called at the
Hôtel de Paris and, on being shown into the presence of the master of
Gardencourt, found Miss Stackpole sitting beside his sofa. A singular
change had in fact occurred in this lady’s relations with Ralph
Touchett. She had not been asked by Isabel to go and see him, but on
hearing that he was too ill to come out had immediately gone of her
own motion. After this she had paid him a daily visit--always under
the conviction that they were great enemies. “Oh yes, we’re intimate
enemies,” Ralph used to say; and he accused her freely--as freely as the
humour of it would allow--of coming to worry him to death. In reality
they became excellent friends, Henrietta much wondering that she should
never have liked him before. Ralph liked her exactly as much as he had
always done; he had never doubted for a moment that she was an excellent
fellow. They talked about everything and always differed; about
everything, that is, but Isabel--a topic as to which Ralph always had
a thin forefinger on his lips. Mr. Bantling on the other hand proved
a great resource; Ralph was capable of discussing Mr. Bantling with
Henrietta for hours. Discussion was stimulated of course by their
inevitable difference of view--Ralph having amused himself with taking
the ground that the genial ex-guardsman was a regular Machiavelli.
Caspar Goodwood could contribute nothing to such a debate; but after
he had been left alone with his host he found there were various other
matters they could take up. It must be admitted that the lady who had
just gone out was not one of these; Caspar granted all Miss Stackpole’s
merits in advance, but had no further remark to make about her. Neither,
after the first allusions, did the two men expatiate upon Mrs. Osmond--a
theme in which Goodwood perceived as many dangers as Ralph. He felt very
sorry for that unclassable personage; he couldn’t bear to see a pleasant
man, so pleasant for all his queerness, so beyond anything to be done.
There was always something to be done, for Goodwood, and he did it in
this case by repeating several times his visit to the Hôtel de Paris.
It seemed to Isabel that she had been very clever; she had artfully
disposed of the superfluous Caspar. She had given him an occupation; she
had converted him into a caretaker of Ralph. She had a plan of making
him travel northward with her cousin as soon as the first mild weather
should allow it. Lord Warburton had brought Ralph to Rome and Mr.
Goodwood should take him away. There seemed a happy symmetry in this,
and she was now intensely eager that Ralph should depart. She had a
constant fear he would die there before her eyes and a horror of the
occurrence of this event at an inn, by her door, which he had so rarely
entered. Ralph must sink to his last rest in his own dear house, in
one of those deep, dim chambers of Gardencourt where the dark ivy would
cluster round the edges of the glimmering window. There seemed to Isabel
in these days something sacred in Gardencourt; no chapter of the past
was more perfectly irrecoverable. When she thought of the months she had
spent there the tears rose to her eyes. She flattered herself, as I
say, upon her ingenuity, but she had need of all she could muster;
for several events occurred which seemed to confront and defy her. The
Countess Gemini arrived from Florence--arrived with her trunks, her
dresses, her chatter, her falsehoods, her frivolity, the strange, the
unholy legend of the number of her lovers. Edward Rosier, who had been
away somewhere,--no one, not even Pansy, knew where,--reappeared in Rome
and began to write her long letters, which she never answered. Madame
Merle returned from Naples and said to her with a strange smile: “What
on earth did you do with Lord Warburton?” As if it were any business of
hers!
CHAPTER XLVIII
One day, toward the end of February, Ralph Touchett made up his mind to
return to England. He had his own reasons for this decision, which
he was not bound to communicate; but Henrietta Stackpole, to whom he
mentioned his intention, flattered herself that she guessed them. She
forbore to express them, however; she only said, after a moment, as she
sat by his sofa: “I suppose you know you can’t go alone?”
“I’ve no idea of doing that,” Ralph answered. “I shall have people with
me.”
“What do you mean by ‘people’? Servants whom you pay?”
“Ah,” said Ralph jocosely, “after all, they’re human beings.”
“Are there any women among them?” Miss Stackpole desired to know.
“You speak as if I had a dozen! No, I confess I haven’t a _soubrette_ in
my employment.”
“Well,” said Henrietta calmly, “you can’t go to England that way. You
must have a woman’s care.”
“I’ve had so much of yours for the past fortnight that it will last me a
good while.”
“You’ve not had enough of it yet. I guess I’ll go with you,” said
Henrietta.
“Go with me?” Ralph slowly raised himself from his sofa.
“Yes, I know you don’t like me, but I’ll go with you all the same. It
would be better for your health to lie down again.”
Ralph looked at her a little; then he slowly relapsed. “I like you very
much,” he said in a moment.
Miss Stackpole gave one of her infrequent laughs. “You needn’t think
that by saying that you can buy me off. I’ll go with you, and what is
more I’ll take care of you.”
“You’re a very good woman,” said Ralph.
“Wait till I get you safely home before you say that. It won’t be easy.
But you had better go, all the same.”
Before she left him, Ralph said to her: “Do you really mean to take care
of me?”
“Well, I mean to try.”
“I notify you then that I submit. Oh, I submit!” And it was perhaps a
sign of submission that a few minutes after she had left him alone he
burst into a loud fit of laughter. It seemed to him so inconsequent,
such a conclusive proof of his having abdicated all functions and
renounced all exercise, that he should start on a journey across Europe
under the supervision of Miss Stackpole. And the great oddity was that
the prospect pleased him; he was gratefully, luxuriously passive. He
felt even impatient to start; and indeed he had an immense longing to
see his own house again. The end of everything was at hand; it seemed
to him he could stretch out his arm and touch the goal. But he wanted to
die at home; it was the only wish he had left--to extend himself in the
large quiet room where he had last seen his father lie, and close his
eyes upon the summer dawn.
That same day Caspar Goodwood came to see him, and he informed his
visitor that Miss Stackpole had taken him up and was to conduct him back
to England. “Ah then,” said Caspar, “I’m afraid I shall be a fifth wheel
to the coach. Mrs. Osmond has made me promise to go with you.”
“Good heavens--it’s the golden age! You’re all too kind.”
“The kindness on my part is to her; it’s hardly to you.”
“Granting that, _she’s_ kind,” smiled Ralph.
“To get people to go with you? Yes, that’s a sort of kindness,” Goodwood
answered without lending himself to the joke. “For myself, however,” he
added, “I’ll go so far as to say that I would much rather travel with
you and Miss Stackpole than with Miss Stackpole alone.”
“And you’d rather stay here than do either,” said Ralph. “There’s really
no need of your coming. Henrietta’s extraordinarily efficient.”
“I’m sure of that. But I’ve promised Mrs. Osmond.”
“You can easily get her to let you off.”
“She wouldn’t let me off for the world. She wants me to look after you,
but that isn’t the principal thing. The principal thing is that she
wants me to leave Rome.”
“Ah, you see too much in it,” Ralph suggested.
“I bore her,” Goodwood went on; “she has nothing to say to me, so she
invented that.”
“Oh then, if it’s a convenience to her I certainly will take you with
me. Though I don’t see why it should be a convenience,” Ralph added in a
moment.
“Well,” said Caspar Goodwood simply, “she thinks I’m watching her.”
“Watching her?”
“Trying to make out if she’s happy.”
“That’s easy to make out,” said Ralph. “She’s the most visibly happy
woman I know.”
“Exactly so; I’m satisfied,” Goodwood answered dryly. For all his
dryness, however, he had more to say. “I’ve been watching her; I was
an old friend and it seemed to me I had the right. She pretends to be
happy; that was what she undertook to be; and I thought I should like to
see for myself what it amounts to. I’ve seen,” he continued with a harsh
ring in his voice, “and I don’t want to see any more. I’m now quite
ready to go.”
“Do you know it strikes me as about time you should?” Ralph rejoined.
And this was the only conversation these gentlemen had about Isabel
Osmond.
Henrietta made her preparations for departure, and among them she found
it proper to say a few words to the Countess Gemini, who returned at
Miss Stackpole’s pension the visit which this lady had paid her in
Florence.
“You were very wrong about Lord Warburton,” she remarked to the
Countess. “I think it right you should know that.”
“About his making love to Isabel? My poor lady, he was at her house
three times a day. He has left traces of his passage!” the Countess
cried.
“He wished to marry your niece; that’s why he came to the house.”
The Countess stared, and then with an inconsiderate laugh: “Is that the
story that Isabel tells? It isn’t bad, as such things go. If he wishes
to marry my niece, pray why doesn’t he do it? Perhaps he has gone to buy
the wedding-ring and will come back with it next month, after I’m gone.”
“No, he’ll not come back. Miss Osmond doesn’t wish to marry him.”
“She’s very accommodating! I knew she was fond of Isabel, but I didn’t
know she carried it so far.”
“I don’t understand you,” said Henrietta coldly, and reflecting that
the Countess was unpleasantly perverse. “I really must stick to my
point--that Isabel never encouraged the attentions of Lord Warburton.”
“My dear friend, what do you and I know about it? All we know is that my
brother’s capable of everything.”
“I don’t know what your brother’s capable of,” said Henrietta with
dignity.
“It’s not her encouraging Warburton that I complain of; it’s her sending
him away. I want particularly to see him. Do you suppose she thought
I would make him faithless?” the Countess continued with audacious
insistence. “However, she’s only keeping him, one can feel that. The
house is full of him there; he’s quite in the air. Oh yes, he has left
traces; I’m sure I shall see him yet.”
“Well,” said Henrietta after a little, with one of those inspirations
which had made the fortune of her letters to the _Interviewer_, “perhaps
he’ll be more successful with you than with Isabel!”
When she told her friend of the offer she had made Ralph Isabel replied
that she could have done nothing that would have pleased her more. It
had always been her faith that at bottom Ralph and this young woman were
made to understand each other. “I don’t care whether he understands me
or not,” Henrietta declared. “The great thing is that he shouldn’t die
in the cars.”
“He won’t do that,” Isabel said, shaking her head with an extension of
faith.
“He won’t if I can help it. I see you want us all to go. I don’t know
what you want to do.”
“I want to be alone,” said Isabel.
“You won’t be that so long as you’ve so much company at home.”
“Ah, they’re part of the comedy. You others are spectators.”
“Do you call it a comedy, Isabel Archer?” Henrietta rather grimly asked.
“The tragedy then if you like. You’re all looking at me; it makes me
uncomfortable.”
Henrietta engaged in this act for a while. “You’re like the stricken
deer, seeking the innermost shade. Oh, you do give me such a sense of
helplessness!” she broke out.
“I’m not at all helpless. There are many things I mean to do.”
“It’s not you I’m speaking of; it’s myself. It’s too much, having come
on purpose, to leave you just as I find you.”
“You don’t do that; you leave me much refreshed,” Isabel said.
“Very mild refreshment--sour lemonade! I want you to promise me
something.”
“I can’t do that. I shall never make another promise. I made such a
solemn one four years ago, and I’ve succeeded so ill in keeping it.”
“You’ve had no encouragement. In this case I should give you the
greatest. Leave your husband before the worst comes; that’s what I want
you to promise.”
“The worst? What do you call the worst?”
“Before your character gets spoiled.”
“Do you mean my disposition? It won’t get spoiled,” Isabel answered,
smiling. “I’m taking very good care of it. I’m extremely struck,” she
added, turning away, “with the off-hand way in which you speak of a
woman’s leaving her husband. It’s easy to see you’ve never had one!”
“Well,” said Henrietta as if she were beginning an argument, “nothing is
more common in our Western cities, and it’s to them, after all, that we
must look in the future.” Her argument, however, does not concern this
history, which has too many other threads to unwind. She announced to
Ralph Touchett that she was ready to leave Rome by any train he might
designate, and Ralph immediately pulled himself together for departure.
Isabel went to see him at the last, and he made the same remark that
Henrietta had made. It struck him that Isabel was uncommonly glad to get
rid of them all.
For all answer to this she gently laid her hand on his, and said in a
low tone, with a quick smile: “My dear Ralph--!”
It was answer enough, and he was quite contented. But he went on in the
same way, jocosely, ingenuously: “I’ve seen less of you than I might,
but it’s better than nothing. And then I’ve heard a great deal about
you.”
“I don’t know from whom, leading the life you’ve done.”
“From the voices of the air! Oh, from no one else; I never let other
people speak of you. They always say you’re ‘charming,’ and that’s so
flat.”
“I might have seen more of you certainly,” Isabel said. “But when one’s
married one has so much occupation.”
“Fortunately I’m not married. When you come to see me in England I
shall be able to entertain you with all the freedom of a bachelor.” He
continued to talk as if they should certainly meet again, and succeeded
in making the assumption appear almost just. He made no allusion to
his term being near, to the probability that he should not outlast the
summer. If he preferred it so, Isabel was willing enough; the reality
was sufficiently distinct without their erecting finger-posts in
conversation. That had been well enough for the earlier time, though
about this, as about his other affairs, Ralph had never been egotistic.
Isabel spoke of his journey, of the stages into which he should
divide it, of the precautions he should take. “Henrietta’s my greatest
precaution,” he went on. “The conscience of that woman’s sublime.”
“Certainly she’ll be very conscientious.”
“Will be? She has been! It’s only because she thinks it’s her duty that
she goes with me. There’s a conception of duty for you.”
“Yes, it’s a generous one,” said Isabel, “and it makes me deeply
ashamed. I ought to go with you, you know.”
“Your husband wouldn’t like that.”
“No, he wouldn’t like it. But I might go, all the same.”
“I’m startled by the boldness of your imagination. Fancy my being a
cause of disagreement between a lady and her husband!”
“That’s why I don’t go,” said Isabel simply--yet not very lucidly.
Ralph understood well enough, however. “I should think so, with all
those occupations you speak of.”
“It isn’t that. I’m afraid,” said Isabel. After a pause she repeated, as
if to make herself, rather than him, hear the words: “I’m afraid.”
Ralph could hardly tell what her tone meant; it was so strangely
deliberate--apparently so void of emotion. Did she wish to do public
penance for a fault of which she had not been convicted? or were her
words simply an attempt at enlightened self-analysis? However this
might be, Ralph could not resist so easy an opportunity. “Afraid of your
husband?”
“Afraid of myself!” she said, getting up. She stood there a moment and
then added: “If I were afraid of my husband that would be simply my
duty. That’s what women are expected to be.”
“Ah yes,” laughed Ralph; “but to make up for it there’s always some man
awfully afraid of some woman!”
She gave no heed to this pleasantry, but suddenly took a different
turn. “With Henrietta at the head of your little band,” she exclaimed
abruptly, “there will be nothing left for Mr. Goodwood!”
“Ah, my dear Isabel,” Ralph answered, “he’s used to that. There is
nothing left for Mr. Goodwood.”
She coloured and then observed, quickly, that she must leave him. They
stood together a moment; both her hands were in both of his. “You’ve
been my best friend,” she said.
“It was for you that I wanted--that I wanted to live. But I’m of no use
to you.”
Then it came over her more poignantly that she should not see him again.
She could not accept that; she could not part with him that way. “If you
should send for me I’d come,” she said at last.
“Your husband won’t consent to that.”
“Oh yes, I can arrange it.”
“I shall keep that for my last pleasure!” said Ralph.
In answer to which she simply kissed him. It was a Thursday, and that
evening Caspar Goodwood came to Palazzo Roccanera. He was among the
first to arrive, and he spent some time in conversation with Gilbert
Osmond, who almost always was present when his wife received. They sat
down together, and Osmond, talkative, communicative, expansive, seemed
possessed with a kind of intellectual gaiety. He leaned back with his
legs crossed, lounging and chatting, while Goodwood, more restless, but
not at all lively, shifted his position, played with his hat, made the
little sofa creak beneath him. Osmond’s face wore a sharp, aggressive
smile; he was as a man whose perceptions have been quickened by good
news. He remarked to Goodwood that he was sorry they were to lose him;
he himself should particularly miss him. He saw so few intelligent
men--they were surprisingly scarce in Rome. He must be sure to come
back; there was something very refreshing, to an inveterate Italian like
himself, in talking with a genuine outsider.
“I’m very fond of Rome, you know,” Osmond said; “but there’s nothing
I like better than to meet people who haven’t that superstition. The
modern world’s after all very fine. Now you’re thoroughly modern and yet
are not at all common. So many of the moderns we see are such very poor
stuff. If they’re the children of the future we’re willing to die young.
Of course the ancients too are often very tiresome. My wife and I like
everything that’s really new--not the mere pretence of it. There’s
nothing new, unfortunately, in ignorance and stupidity. We see plenty
of that in forms that offer themselves as a revelation of progress, of
light. A revelation of vulgarity! There’s a certain kind of vulgarity
which I believe is really new; I don’t think there ever was anything
like it before. Indeed I don’t find vulgarity, at all, before the
present century. You see a faint menace of it here and there in the
last, but to-day the air has grown so dense that delicate things
are literally not recognised. Now, we’ve liked you--!” With which
he hesitated a moment, laying his hand gently on Goodwood’s knee and
smiling with a mixture of assurance and embarrassment. “I’m going to say
something extremely offensive and patronising, but you must let me
have the satisfaction of it. We’ve liked you because--because you’ve
reconciled us a little to the future. If there are to be a certain
number of people like you--_à la bonne heure_! I’m talking for my wife as
well as for myself, you see. She speaks for me, my wife; why shouldn’t
I speak for her? We’re as united, you know, as the candlestick and the
snuffers. Am I assuming too much when I say that I think I’ve understood
from you that your occupations have been--a--commercial? There’s a
danger in that, you know; but it’s the way you have escaped that
strikes us. Excuse me if my little compliment seems in execrable taste;
fortunately my wife doesn’t hear me. What I mean is that you might have
been--a--what I was mentioning just now. The whole American world was
in a conspiracy to make you so. But you resisted, you’ve something about
you that saved you. And yet you’re so modern, so modern; the most modern
man we know! We shall always be delighted to see you again.”
I have said that Osmond was in good humour, and these remarks will give
ample evidence of the fact. They were infinitely more personal than he
usually cared to be, and if Caspar Goodwood had attended to them more
closely he might have thought that the defence of delicacy was in rather
odd hands. We may believe, however, that Osmond knew very well what
he was about, and that if he chose to use the tone of patronage with a
grossness not in his habits he had an excellent reason for the escapade.
Goodwood had only a vague sense that he was laying it on somehow; he
scarcely knew where the mixture was applied. Indeed he scarcely knew
what Osmond was talking about; he wanted to be alone with Isabel, and
that idea spoke louder to him than her husband’s perfectly-pitched
voice. He watched her talking with other people and wondered when she
would be at liberty and whether he might ask her to go into one of the
other rooms. His humour was not, like Osmond’s, of the best; there was
an element of dull rage in his consciousness of things. Up to this time
he had not disliked Osmond personally; he had only thought him very
well-informed and obliging and more than he had supposed like the person
whom Isabel Archer would naturally marry. His host had won in the open
field a great advantage over him, and Goodwood had too strong a sense
of fair play to have been moved to underrate him on that account. He
had not tried positively to think well of him; this was a flight of
sentimental benevolence of which, even in the days when he came
nearest to reconciling himself to what had happened, Goodwood was
quite incapable. He accepted him as rather a brilliant personage of the
amateurish kind, afflicted with a redundancy of leisure which it amused
him to work off in little refinements of conversation. But he only half
trusted him; he could never make out why the deuce Osmond should lavish
refinements of any sort upon _him_. It made him suspect that he found some
private entertainment in it, and it ministered to a general impression
that his triumphant rival had in his composition a streak of perversity.
He knew indeed that Osmond could have no reason to wish him evil; he
had nothing to fear from him. He had carried off a supreme advantage and
could afford to be kind to a man who had lost everything. It was true
that Goodwood had at times grimly wished he were dead and would have
liked to kill him; but Osmond had no means of knowing this, for practice
had made the younger man perfect in the art of appearing inaccessible
to-day to any violent emotion. He cultivated this art in order to
deceive himself, but it was others that he deceived first. He cultivated
it, moreover, with very limited success; of which there could be no
better proof than the deep, dumb irritation that reigned in his
soul when he heard Osmond speak of his wife’s feelings as if he were
commissioned to answer for them.
That was all he had had an ear for in what his host said to him this
evening; he had been conscious that Osmond made more of a point even
than usual of referring to the conjugal harmony prevailing at Palazzo
Roccanera. He had been more careful than ever to speak as if he and his
wife had all things in sweet community and it were as natural to each
of them to say “we” as to say “I”. In all this there was an air of
intention that had puzzled and angered our poor Bostonian, who could
only reflect for his comfort that Mrs. Osmond’s relations with her
husband were none of his business. He had no proof whatever that her
husband misrepresented her, and if he judged her by the surface of
things was bound to believe that she liked her life. She had never given
him the faintest sign of discontent. Miss Stackpole had told him that
she had lost her illusions, but writing for the papers had made Miss
Stackpole sensational. She was too fond of early news. Moreover, since
her arrival in Rome she had been much on her guard; she had pretty well
ceased to flash her lantern at him. This indeed, it may be said for
her, would have been quite against her conscience. She had now seen
the reality of Isabel’s situation, and it had inspired her with a just
reserve. Whatever could be done to improve it the most useful form of
assistance would not be to inflame her former lovers with a sense of her
wrongs. Miss Stackpole continued to take a deep interest in the state
of Mr. Goodwood’s feelings, but she showed it at present only by sending
him choice extracts, humorous and other, from the American journals, of
which she received several by every post and which she always perused
with a pair of scissors in her hand. The articles she cut out she placed
in an envelope addressed to Mr. Goodwood, which she left with her own
hand at his hotel. He never asked her a question about Isabel: hadn’t
he come five thousand miles to see for himself? He was thus not in the
least authorised to think Mrs. Osmond unhappy; but the very absence of
authorisation operated as an irritant, ministered to the harsh-ness
with which, in spite of his theory that he had ceased to care, he now
recognised that, so far as she was concerned, the future had nothing
more for him. He had not even the satisfaction of knowing the truth;
apparently he could not even be trusted to respect her if she _were_
unhappy. He was hopeless, helpless, useless. To this last character
she had called his attention by her ingenious plan for making him
leave Rome. He had no objection whatever to doing what he could for
her cousin, but it made him grind his teeth to think that of all the
services she might have asked of him this was the one she had been eager
to select. There had been no danger of her choosing one that would have
kept him in Rome.
To-night what he was chiefly thinking of was that he was to leave her
to-morrow and that he had gained nothing by coming but the knowledge
that he was as little wanted as ever. About herself he had gained no
knowledge; she was imperturbable, inscrutable, impenetrable. He felt the
old bitterness, which he had tried so hard to swallow, rise again in his
throat, and he knew there are disappointments that last as long as life.
Osmond went on talking; Goodwood was vaguely aware that he was touching
again upon his perfect intimacy with his wife. It seemed to him for a
moment that the man had a kind of demonic imagination; it was impossible
that without malice he should have selected so unusual a topic. But what
did it matter, after all, whether he were demonic or not, and whether
she loved him or hated him? She might hate him to the death without
one’s gaining a straw one’s self. “You travel, by the by, with Ralph
Touchett,” Osmond said. “I suppose that means you’ll move slowly?”
“I don’t know. I shall do just as he likes.”
“You’re very accommodating. We’re immensely obliged to you; you must
really let me say it. My wife has probably expressed to you what we
feel. Touchett has been on our minds all winter; it has looked more than
once as if he would never leave Rome. He ought never to have come; it’s
worse than an imprudence for people in that state to travel; it’s a kind
of indelicacy. I wouldn’t for the world be under such an obligation to
Touchett as he has been to--to my wife and me. Other people inevitably
have to look after him, and every one isn’t so generous as you.”
“I’ve nothing else to do,” Caspar said dryly.
Osmond looked at him a moment askance. “You ought to marry, and then
you’d have plenty to do! It’s true that in that case you wouldn’t be
quite so available for deeds of mercy.”
“Do you find that as a married man you’re so much occupied?” the young
man mechanically asked.
“Ah, you see, being married’s in itself an occupation. It isn’t always
active; it’s often passive; but that takes even more attention. Then my
wife and I do so many things together. We read, we study, we make music,
we walk, we drive--we talk even, as when we first knew each other. I
delight, to this hour, in my wife’s conversation. If you’re ever bored
take my advice and get married. Your wife indeed may bore you, in that
case; but you’ll never bore yourself. You’ll always have something to
say to yourself--always have a subject of reflection.”
“I’m not bored,” said Goodwood. “I’ve plenty to think about and to say
to myself.”
“More than to say to others!” Osmond exclaimed with a light laugh.
“Where shall you go next? I mean after you’ve consigned Touchett to his
natural caretakers--I believe his mother’s at last coming back to look
after him. That little lady’s superb; she neglects her duties with a
finish--! Perhaps you’ll spend the summer in England?”
“I don’t know. I’ve no plans.”
“Happy man! That’s a little bleak, but it’s very free.”
“Oh yes, I’m very free.”
“Free to come back to Rome I hope,” said Osmond as he saw a group of
new visitors enter the room. “Remember that when you do come we count on
you!”
Goodwood had meant to go away early, but the evening elapsed without
his having a chance to speak to Isabel otherwise than as one of several
associated interlocutors. There was something perverse in the inveteracy
with which she avoided him; his unquenchable rancour discovered an
intention where there was certainly no appearance of one. There was
absolutely no appearance of one. She met his eyes with her clear
hospitable smile, which seemed almost to ask that he would come and help
her to entertain some of her visitors. To such suggestions, however, he
opposed but a stiff impatience. He wandered about and waited; he talked
to the few people he knew, who found him for the first time rather
self-contradictory. This was indeed rare with Caspar Goodwood, though he
often contradicted others. There was often music at Palazzo Roccanera,
and it was usually very good. Under cover of the music he managed to
contain himself; but toward the end, when he saw the people beginning to
go, he drew near to Isabel and asked her in a low tone if he might
not speak to her in one of the other rooms, which he had just assured
himself was empty. She smiled as if she wished to oblige him but found
her self absolutely prevented. “I’m afraid it’s impossible. People are
saying good-night, and I must be where they can see me.”
“I shall wait till they are all gone then.”
She hesitated a moment. “Ah, that will be delightful!” she exclaimed.
And he waited, though it took a long time yet. There were several
people, at the end, who seemed tethered to the carpet. The Countess
Gemini, who was never herself till midnight, as she said, displayed no
consciousness that the entertainment was over; she had still a little
circle of gentlemen in front of the fire, who every now and then broke
into a united laugh. Osmond had disappeared--he never bade good-bye to
people; and as the Countess was extending her range, according to her
custom at this period of the evening, Isabel had sent Pansy to bed.
Isabel sat a little apart; she too appeared to wish her sister-in-law
would sound a lower note and let the last loiterers depart in peace.
“May I not say a word to you now?” Goodwood presently asked her. She
got up immediately, smiling. “Certainly, we’ll go somewhere else if you
like.” They went together, leaving the Countess with her little circle,
and for a moment after they had crossed the threshold neither of them
spoke. Isabel would not sit down; she stood in the middle of the room
slowly fanning herself; she had for him the same familiar grace. She
seemed to wait for him to speak. Now that he was alone with her all the
passion he had never stifled surged into his senses; it hummed in his
eyes and made things swim round him. The bright, empty room grew dim and
blurred, and through the heaving veil he felt her hover before him with
gleaming eyes and parted lips. If he had seen more distinctly he would
have perceived her smile was fixed and a trifle forced--that she was
frightened at what she saw in his own face. “I suppose you wish to bid
me goodbye?” she said.
“Yes--but I don’t like it. I don’t want to leave Rome,” he answered with
almost plaintive honesty.
“I can well imagine. It’s wonderfully good of you. I can’t tell you how
kind I think you.”
For a moment more he said nothing. “With a few words like that you make
me go.”
“You must come back some day,” she brightly returned.
“Some day? You mean as long a time hence as possible.”
“Oh no; I don’t mean all that.”
“What do you mean? I don’t understand! But I said I’d go, and I’ll go,”
 Goodwood added.
“Come back whenever you like,” said Isabel with attempted lightness.
“I don’t care a straw for your cousin!” Caspar broke out.
“Is that what you wished to tell me?”
“No, no; I didn’t want to tell you anything; I wanted to ask you--” he
paused a moment, and then--“what have you really made of your life?” he
said, in a low, quick tone. He paused again, as if for an answer; but
she said nothing, and he went on: “I can’t understand, I can’t penetrate
you! What am I to believe--what do you want me to think?” Still she said
nothing; she only stood looking at him, now quite without pretending to
ease. “I’m told you’re unhappy, and if you are I should like to know it.
That would be something for me. But you yourself say you’re happy, and
you’re somehow so still, so smooth, so hard. You’re completely changed.
You conceal everything; I haven’t really come near you.”
“You come very near,” Isabel said gently, but in a tone of warning.
“And yet I don’t touch you! I want to know the truth. Have you done
well?”
“You ask a great deal.”
“Yes--I’ve always asked a great deal. Of course you won’t tell me. I
shall never know if you can help it. And then it’s none of my business.”
 He had spoken with a visible effort to control himself, to give a
considerate form to an inconsiderate state of mind. But the sense that
it was his last chance, that he loved her and had lost her, that she
would think him a fool whatever he should say, suddenly gave him a
lash and added a deep vibration to his low voice. “You’re perfectly
inscrutable, and that’s what makes me think you’ve something to hide. I
tell you I don’t care a straw for your cousin, but I don’t mean that I
don’t like him. I mean that it isn’t because I like him that I go away
with him. I’d go if he were an idiot and you should have asked me. If
you should ask me I’d go to Siberia to-morrow. Why do you want me to
leave the place? You must have some reason for that; if you were as
contented as you pretend you are you wouldn’t care. I’d rather know the
truth about you, even if it’s damnable, than have come here for nothing.
That isn’t what I came for. I thought I shouldn’t care. I came because I
wanted to assure myself that I needn’t think of you any more. I haven’t
thought of anything else, and you’re quite right to wish me to go away.
But if I must go, there’s no harm in my letting myself out for a single
moment, is there? If you’re really hurt--if _he_ hurts you--nothing I say
will hurt you. When I tell you I love you it’s simply what I came for. I
thought it was for something else; but it was for that. I shouldn’t
say it if I didn’t believe I should never see you again. It’s the last
time--let me pluck a single flower! I’ve no right to say that, I know;
and you’ve no right to listen. But you don’t listen; you never listen,
you’re always thinking of something else. After this I must go, of
course; so I shall at least have a reason. Your asking me is no reason,
not a real one. I can’t judge by your husband,” he went on irrelevantly,
almost incoherently; “I don’t understand him; he tells me you adore each
other. Why does he tell me that? What business is it of mine? When I say
that to you, you look strange. But you always look strange. Yes, you’ve
something to hide. It’s none of my business--very true. But I love you,”
 said Caspar Goodwood.
As he said, she looked strange. She turned her eyes to the door by which
they had entered and raised her fan as if in warning.
“You’ve behaved so well; don’t spoil it,” she uttered softly.
“No one hears me. It’s wonderful what you tried to put me off with. I
love you as I’ve never loved you.”
“I know it. I knew it as soon as you consented to go.”
“You can’t help it--of course not. You would if you could, but
you can’t, unfortunately. Unfortunately for me, I mean. I ask
nothing--nothing, that is, I shouldn’t. But I do ask one sole
satisfaction:--that you tell me--that you tell me--!”
“That I tell you what?”
“Whether I may pity you.”
“Should you like that?” Isabel asked, trying to smile again.
“To pity you? Most assuredly! That at least would be doing something.
I’d give my life to it.”
She raised her fan to her face, which it covered all except her eyes.
They rested a moment on his. “Don’t give your life to it; but give a
thought to it every now and then.” And with that she went back to the
Countess Gemini.
CHAPTER XLIX
Madame Merle had not made her appearance at Palazzo Roccanera on the
evening of that Thursday of which I have narrated some of the incidents,
and Isabel, though she observed her absence, was not surprised by it.
Things had passed between them which added no stimulus to sociability,
and to appreciate which we must glance a little backward. It has been
mentioned that Madame Merle returned from Naples shortly after Lord
Warburton had left Rome, and that on her first meeting with Isabel
(whom, to do her justice, she came immediately to see) her first
utterance had been an enquiry as to the whereabouts of this nobleman,
for whom she appeared to hold her dear friend accountable.
“Please don’t talk of him,” said Isabel for answer; “we’ve heard so much
of him of late.”
Madame Merle bent her head on one side a little, protestingly, and
smiled at the left corner of her mouth. “You’ve heard, yes. But you must
remember that I’ve not, in Naples. I hoped to find him here and to be
able to congratulate Pansy.”
“You may congratulate Pansy still; but not on marrying Lord Warburton.”
“How you say that! Don’t you know I had set my heart on it?” Madame
Merle asked with a great deal of spirit, but still with the intonation
of good-humour.
Isabel was discomposed, but she was determined to be good-humoured too.
“You shouldn’t have gone to Naples then. You should have stayed here to
watch the affair.”
“I had too much confidence in you. But do you think it’s too late?”
“You had better ask Pansy,” said Isabel.
“I shall ask her what you’ve said to her.”
These words seemed to justify the impulse of self-defence aroused
on Isabel’s part by her perceiving that her visitor’s attitude was a
critical one. Madame Merle, as we know, had been very discreet hitherto;
she had never criticised; she had been markedly afraid of intermeddling.
But apparently she had only reserved herself for this occasion, since
she now had a dangerous quickness in her eye and an air of irritation
which even her admirable ease was not able to transmute. She had
suffered a disappointment which excited Isabel’s surprise--our heroine
having no knowledge of her zealous interest in Pansy’s marriage; and
she betrayed it in a manner which quickened Mrs. Osmond’s alarm. More
clearly than ever before Isabel heard a cold, mocking voice proceed from
she knew not where, in the dim void that surrounded her, and declare
that this bright, strong, definite, worldly woman, this incarnation of
the practical, the personal, the immediate, was a powerful agent in her
destiny. She was nearer to her than Isabel had yet discovered, and her
nearness was not the charming accident she had so long supposed. The
sense of accident indeed had died within her that day when she happened
to be struck with the manner in which the wonderful lady and her own
husband sat together in private. No definite suspicion had as yet
taken its place; but it was enough to make her view this friend with a
different eye, to have been led to reflect that there was more intention
in her past behaviour than she had allowed for at the time. Ah yes,
there had been intention, there had been intention, Isabel said to
herself; and she seemed to wake from a long pernicious dream. What was
it that brought home to her that Madame Merle’s intention had not been
good? Nothing but the mistrust which had lately taken body and which
married itself now to the fruitful wonder produced by her visitor’s
challenge on behalf of poor Pansy. There was something in this challenge
which had at the very outset excited an answering defiance; a nameless
vitality which she could see to have been absent from her friend’s
professions of delicacy and caution. Madame Merle had been unwilling to
interfere, certainly, but only so long as there was nothing to interfere
with. It will perhaps seem to the reader that Isabel went fast in
casting doubt, on mere suspicion, on a sincerity proved by several
years of good offices. She moved quickly indeed, and with reason, for a
strange truth was filtering into her soul. Madame Merle’s interest was
identical with Osmond’s: that was enough. “I think Pansy will tell
you nothing that will make you more angry,” she said in answer to her
companion’s last remark.
“I’m not in the least angry. I’ve only a great desire to retrieve the
situation. Do you consider that Warburton has left us for ever?”
“I can’t tell you; I don’t understand you. It’s all over; please let it
rest. Osmond has talked to me a great deal about it, and I’ve nothing
more to say or to hear. I’ve no doubt,” Isabel added, “that he’ll be
very happy to discuss the subject with you.”
“I know what he thinks; he came to see me last evening.”
“As soon as you had arrived? Then you know all about it and you needn’t
apply to me for information.”
“It isn’t information I want. At bottom it’s sympathy. I had set my
heart on that marriage; the idea did what so few things do--it satisfied
the imagination.”
“Your imagination, yes. But not that of the persons concerned.”
“You mean by that of course that I’m not concerned. Of course not
directly. But when one’s such an old friend one can’t help having
something at stake. You forget how long I’ve known Pansy. You mean,
of course,” Madame Merle added, “that _you_ are one of the persons
concerned.”
“No; that’s the last thing I mean. I’m very weary of it all.”
Madame Merle hesitated a little. “Ah yes, your work’s done.”
“Take care what you say,” said Isabel very gravely.
“Oh, I take care; never perhaps more than when it appears least. Your
husband judges you severely.”
Isabel made for a moment no answer to this; she felt choked with
bitterness. It was not the insolence of Madame Merle’s informing her
that Osmond had been taking her into his confidence as against his wife
that struck her most; for she was not quick to believe that this was
meant for insolence. Madame Merle was very rarely insolent, and only
when it was exactly right. It was not right now, or at least it was not
right yet. What touched Isabel like a drop of corrosive acid upon an
open wound was the knowledge that Osmond dishonoured her in his words as
well as in his thoughts. “Should you like to know how I judge _him_?” she
asked at last.
“No, because you’d never tell me. And it would be painful for me to
know.”
There was a pause, and for the first time since she had known her Isabel
thought Madame Merle disagreeable. She wished she would leave her.
“Remember how attractive Pansy is, and don’t despair,” she said
abruptly, with a desire that this should close their interview.
But Madame Merle’s expansive presence underwent no contraction. She only
gathered her mantle about her and, with the movement, scattered upon the
air a faint, agreeable fragrance. “I don’t despair; I feel encouraged.
And I didn’t come to scold you; I came if possible to learn the truth. I
know you’ll tell it if I ask you. It’s an immense blessing with you that
one can count upon that. No, you won’t believe what a comfort I take in
it.”
“What truth do you speak of?” Isabel asked, wondering.
“Just this: whether Lord Warburton changed his mind quite of his own
movement or because you recommended it. To please himself I mean, or to
please you. Think of the confidence I must still have in you, in spite
of having lost a little of it,” Madame Merle continued with a smile, “to
ask such a question as that!” She sat looking at her friend, to judge
the effect of her words, and then went on: “Now don’t be heroic, don’t
be unreasonable, don’t take offence. It seems to me I do you an honour
in speaking so. I don’t know another woman to whom I would do it. I
haven’t the least idea that any other woman would tell me the truth. And
don’t you see how well it is that your husband should know it? It’s
true that he doesn’t appear to have had any tact whatever in trying to
extract it; he has indulged in gratuitous suppositions. But that doesn’t
alter the fact that it would make a difference in his view of his
daughter’s prospects to know distinctly what really occurred. If Lord
Warburton simply got tired of the poor child, that’s one thing, and it’s
a pity. If he gave her up to please you it’s another. That’s a pity too,
but in a different way. Then, in the latter case, you’d perhaps resign
yourself to not being pleased--to simply seeing your step-daughter
married. Let him off--let us have him!”
Madame Merle had proceeded very deliberately, watching her companion and
apparently thinking she could proceed safely. As she went on Isabel grew
pale; she clasped her hands more tightly in her lap. It was not that her
visitor had at last thought it the right time to be insolent; for this
was not what was most apparent. It was a worse horror than that. “Who
are you--what are you?” Isabel murmured. “What have you to do with my
husband?” It was strange that for the moment she drew as near to him as
if she had loved him.
“Ah then, you take it heroically! I’m very sorry. Don’t think, however,
that I shall do so.”
“What have you to do with me?” Isabel went on.
Madame Merle slowly got up, stroking her muff, but not removing her eyes
from Isabel’s face. “Everything!” she answered.
Isabel sat there looking up at her, without rising; her face was almost
a prayer to be enlightened. But the light of this woman’s eyes seemed
only a darkness. “Oh misery!” she murmured at last; and she fell
back, covering her face with her hands. It had come over her like a
high-surging wave that Mrs. Touchett was right. Madame Merle had married
her. Before she uncovered her face again that lady had left the room.
Isabel took a drive alone that afternoon; she wished to be far away,
under the sky, where she could descend from her carriage and tread
upon the daisies. She had long before this taken old Rome into her
confidence, for in a world of ruins the ruin of her happiness seemed a
less unnatural catastrophe. She rested her weariness upon things that
had crumbled for centuries and yet still were upright; she dropped her
secret sadness into the silence of lonely places, where its very modern
quality detached itself and grew objective, so that as she sat in a
sun-warmed angle on a winter’s day, or stood in a mouldy church to which
no one came, she could almost smile at it and think of its smallness.
Small it was, in the large Roman record, and her haunting sense of the
continuity of the human lot easily carried her from the less to the
greater. She had become deeply, tenderly acquainted with Rome; it
interfused and moderated her passion. But she had grown to think of it
chiefly as the place where people had suffered. This was what came to
her in the starved churches, where the marble columns, transferred from
pagan ruins, seemed to offer her a companionship in endurance and the
musty incense to be a compound of long-unanswered prayers. There was
no gentler nor less consistent heretic than Isabel; the firmest of
worshippers, gazing at dark altar-pictures or clustered candles, could
not have felt more intimately the suggestiveness of these objects nor
have been more liable at such moments to a spiritual visitation. Pansy,
as we know, was almost always her companion, and of late the Countess
Gemini, balancing a pink parasol, had lent brilliancy to their equipage;
but she still occasionally found herself alone when it suited her
mood and where it suited the place. On such occasions she had several
resorts; the most accessible of which perhaps was a seat on the low
parapet which edges the wide grassy space before the high, cold front
of Saint John Lateran, whence you look across the Campagna at the
far-trailing outline of the Alban Mount and at that mighty plain,
between, which is still so full of all that has passed from it. After
the departure of her cousin and his companions she roamed more than
usual; she carried her sombre spirit from one familiar shrine to the
other. Even when Pansy and the Countess were with her she felt the touch
of a vanished world. The carriage, leaving the walls of Rome behind,
rolled through narrow lanes where the wild honeysuckle had begun to
tangle itself in the hedges, or waited for her in quiet places where
the fields lay near, while she strolled further and further over the
flower-freckled turf, or sat on a stone that had once had a use and
gazed through the veil of her personal sadness at the splendid sadness
of the scene--at the dense, warm light, the far gradations and soft
confusions of colour, the motionless shepherds in lonely attitudes, the
hills where the cloud-shadows had the lightness of a blush.
On the afternoon I began with speaking of, she had taken a resolution
not to think of Madame Merle; but the resolution proved vain, and this
lady’s image hovered constantly before her. She asked herself, with an
almost childlike horror of the supposition, whether to this intimate
friend of several years the great historical epithet of wicked were
to be applied. She knew the idea only by the Bible and other literary
works; to the best of her belief she had had no personal acquaintance
with wickedness. She had desired a large acquaintance with human life,
and in spite of her having flattered herself that she cultivated it with
some success this elementary privilege had been denied her. Perhaps it
was not wicked--in the historic sense--to be even deeply false; for that
was what Madame Merle had been--deeply, deeply, deeply. Isabel’s Aunt
Lydia had made this discovery long before, and had mentioned it to her
niece; but Isabel had flattered herself at this time that she had a much
richer view of things, especially of the spontaneity of her own
career and the nobleness of her own interpretations, than poor
stiffly-reasoning Mrs. Touchett. Madame Merle had done what she wanted;
she had brought about the union of her two friends; a reflection which
could not fail to make it a matter of wonder that she should so much
have desired such an event. There were people who had the match-making
passion, like the votaries of art for art; but Madame Merle, great
artist as she was, was scarcely one of these. She thought too ill of
marriage, too ill even of life; she had desired that particular marriage
but had not desired others. She had therefore had a conception of gain,
and Isabel asked herself where she had found her profit. It took her
naturally a long time to discover, and even then her discovery was
imperfect. It came back to her that Madame Merle, though she had seemed
to like her from their first meeting at Gardencourt, had been doubly
affectionate after Mr. Touchett’s death and after learning that her
young friend had been subject to the good old man’s charity. She had
found her profit not in the gross device of borrowing money, but in
the more refined idea of introducing one of her intimates to the young
woman’s fresh and ingenuous fortune. She had naturally chosen her
closest intimate, and it was already vivid enough to Isabel that Gilbert
occupied this position. She found herself confronted in this manner with
the conviction that the man in the world whom she had supposed to be the
least sordid had married her, like a vulgar adventurer, for her money.
Strange to say, it had never before occurred to her; if she had thought
a good deal of harm of Osmond she had not done him this particular
injury. This was the worst she could think of, and she had been saying
to herself that the worst was still to come. A man might marry a woman
for her money perfectly well; the thing was often done. But at least
he should let her know. She wondered whether, since he had wanted her
money, her money would now satisfy him. Would he take her money and let
her go. Ah, if Mr. Touchett’s great charity would but help her to-day it
would be blessed indeed! It was not slow to occur to her that if Madame
Merle had wished to do Gilbert a service his recognition to her of the
boon must have lost its warmth. What must be his feelings to-day in
regard to his too zealous benefactress, and what expression must they
have found on the part of such a master of irony? It is a singular, but
a characteristic, fact that before Isabel returned from her silent drive
she had broken its silence by the soft exclamation: “Poor, poor Madame
Merle!”
Her compassion would perhaps have been justified if on this same
afternoon she had been concealed behind one of the valuable curtains of
time-softened damask which dressed the interesting little salon of the
lady to whom it referred; the carefully-arranged apartment to which
we once paid a visit in company with the discreet Mr. Rosier. In that
apartment, towards six o’clock, Gilbert Osmond was seated, and his
hostess stood before him as Isabel had seen her stand on an occasion
commemorated in this history with an emphasis appropriate not so much to
its apparent as to its real importance.
“I don’t believe you’re unhappy; I believe you like it,” said Madame
Merle.
“Did I say I was unhappy?” Osmond asked with a face grave enough to
suggest that he might have been.
“No, but you don’t say the contrary, as you ought in common gratitude.”
“Don’t talk about gratitude,” he returned dryly. “And don’t aggravate
me,” he added in a moment.
Madame Merle slowly seated herself, with her arms folded and her white
hands arranged as a support to one of them and an ornament, as it were,
to the other. She looked exquisitely calm but impressively sad. “On
your side, don’t try to frighten me. I wonder if you guess some of my
thoughts.”
“I trouble about them no more than I can help. I’ve quite enough of my
own.”
“That’s because they’re so delightful.”
Osmond rested his head against the back of his chair and looked at
his companion with a cynical directness which seemed also partly an
expression of fatigue. “You do aggravate me,” he remarked in a moment.
“I’m very tired.”
“_Eh moi donc!_” cried Madame Merle.
“With you it’s because you fatigue yourself. With me it’s not my own
fault.”
“When I fatigue myself it’s for you. I’ve given you an interest. That’s
a great gift.”
“Do you call it an interest?” Osmond enquired with detachment.
“Certainly, since it helps you to pass your time.”
“The time has never seemed longer to me than this winter.”
“You’ve never looked better; you’ve never been so agreeable, so
brilliant.”
“Damn my brilliancy!” he thoughtfully murmured. “How little, after all,
you know me!”
“If I don’t know you I know nothing,” smiled Madame Merle. “You’ve the
feeling of complete success.”
“No, I shall not have that till I’ve made you stop judging me.”
“I did that long ago. I speak from old knowledge. But you express
yourself more too.”
Osmond just hung fire. “I wish you’d express yourself less!”
“You wish to condemn me to silence? Remember that I’ve never been a
chatterbox. At any rate there are three or four things I should like to
say to you first. Your wife doesn’t know what to do with herself,” she
went on with a change of tone.
“Pardon me; she knows perfectly. She has a line sharply drawn. She means
to carry out her ideas.”
“Her ideas to-day must be remarkable.”
“Certainly they are. She has more of them than ever.”
“She was unable to show me any this morning,” said Madame Merle. “She
seemed in a very simple, almost in a stupid, state of mind. She was
completely bewildered.”
“You had better say at once that she was pathetic.”
“Ah no, I don’t want to encourage you too much.”
He still had his head against the cushion behind him; the ankle of one
foot rested on the other knee. So he sat for a while. “I should like to
know what’s the matter with you,” he said at last.
“The matter--the matter--!” And here Madame Merle stopped. Then she went
on with a sudden outbreak of passion, a burst of summer thunder in a
clear sky: “The matter is that I would give my right hand to be able to
weep, and that I can’t!”
“What good would it do you to weep?”
“It would make me feel as I felt before I knew you.”
“If I’ve dried your tears, that’s something. But I’ve seen you shed
them.”
“Oh, I believe you’ll make me cry still. I mean make me howl like a
wolf. I’ve a great hope, I’ve a great need, of that. I was vile this
morning; I was horrid,” she said.
“If Isabel was in the stupid state of mind you mention she probably
didn’t perceive it,” Osmond answered.
“It was precisely my deviltry that stupefied her. I couldn’t help it; I
was full of something bad. Perhaps it was something good; I don’t know.
You’ve not only dried up my tears; you’ve dried up my soul.”
“It’s not I then that am responsible for my wife’s condition,” Osmond
said. “It’s pleasant to think that I shall get the benefit of your
influence upon her. Don’t you know the soul is an immortal principle?
How can it suffer alteration?”
“I don’t believe at all that it’s an immortal principle. I believe it
can perfectly be destroyed. That’s what has happened to mine, which
was a very good one to start with; and it’s you I have to thank for it.
You’re _very_ bad,” she added with gravity in her emphasis.
“Is this the way we’re to end?” Osmond asked with the same studied
coldness.
“I don’t know how we’re to end. I wish I did--How do bad people
end?--especially as to their _common_ crimes. You have made me as bad as
yourself.”
“I don’t understand you. You seem to me quite good enough,” said Osmond,
his conscious indifference giving an extreme effect to the words.
Madame Merle’s self-possession tended on the contrary to diminish, and
she was nearer losing it than on any occasion on which we have had the
pleasure of meeting her. The glow of her eye turners sombre; her smile
betrayed a painful effort. “Good enough for anything that I’ve done with
myself? I suppose that’s what you mean.”
“Good enough to be always charming!” Osmond exclaimed, smiling too.
“Oh God!” his companion murmured; and, sitting there in her ripe
freshness, she had recourse to the same gesture she had provoked on
Isabel’s part in the morning: she bent her face and covered it with her
hands.
“Are you going to weep after all?” Osmond asked; and on her remaining
motionless he went on: “Have I ever complained to you?”
She dropped her hands quickly. “No, you’ve taken your revenge
otherwise--you have taken it on _her_.”
Osmond threw back his head further; he looked a while at the ceiling
and might have been supposed to be appealing, in an informal way, to the
heavenly powers. “Oh, the imagination of women! It’s always vulgar, at
bottom. You talk of revenge like a third-rate novelist.”
“Of course you haven’t complained. You’ve enjoyed your triumph too
much.”
“I’m rather curious to know what you call my triumph.”
“You’ve made your wife afraid of you.”
Osmond changed his position; he leaned forward, resting his elbows on
his knees and looking a while at a beautiful old Persian rug, at
his feet. He had an air of refusing to accept any one’s valuation
of anything, even of time, and of preferring to abide by his own; a
peculiarity which made him at moments an irritating person to converse
with. “Isabel’s not afraid of me, and it’s not what I wish,” he said
at last. “To what do you want to provoke me when you say such things as
that?”
“I’ve thought over all the harm you can do me,” Madame Merle answered.
“Your wife was afraid of me this morning, but in me it was really you
she feared.”
“You may have said things that were in very bad taste; I’m not
responsible for that. I didn’t see the use of your going to see her at
all: you’re capable of acting without her. I’ve not made you afraid of
me that I can see,” he went on; “how then should I have made her? You’re
at least as brave. I can’t think where you’ve picked up such rubbish;
one might suppose you knew me by this time.” He got up as he spoke and
walked to the chimney, where he stood a moment bending his eye, as if
he had seen them for the first time, on the delicate specimens of rare
porcelain with which it was covered. He took up a small cup and held it
in his hand; then, still holding it and leaning his arm on the mantel,
he pursued: “You always see too much in everything; you overdo it; you
lose sight of the real. I’m much simpler than you think.”
“I think you’re very simple.” And Madame Merle kept her eye on her cup.
“I’ve come to that with time. I judged you, as I say, of old; but it’s
only since your marriage that I’ve understood you. I’ve seen better what
you have been to your wife than I ever saw what you were for me. Please
be very careful of that precious object.”
“It already has a wee bit of a tiny crack,” said Osmond dryly as he put
it down. “If you didn’t understand me before I married it was cruelly
rash of you to put me into such a box. However, I took a fancy to my box
myself; I thought it would be a comfortable fit. I asked very little; I
only asked that she should like me.”
“That she should like you so much!”
“So much, of course; in such a case one asks the maximum. That she
should adore me, if you will. Oh yes, I wanted that.”
“I never adored you,” said Madame Merle.
“Ah, but you pretended to!”
“It’s true that you never accused me of being a comfortable fit,” Madame
Merle went on.
“My wife has declined--declined to do anything of the sort,” said
Osmond. “If you’re determined to make a tragedy of that, the tragedy’s
hardly for her.”
“The tragedy’s for me!” Madame Merle exclaimed, rising with a long
low sigh but having a glance at the same time for the contents of her
mantel-shelf.
“It appears that I’m to be severely taught the disadvantages of a false
position.”
“You express yourself like a sentence in a copybook. We must look for
our comfort where we can find it. If my wife doesn’t like me, at least
my child does. I shall look for compensations in Pansy. Fortunately I
haven’t a fault to find with her.”
“Ah,” she said softly, “if I had a child--!”
Osmond waited, and then, with a little formal air, “The children of
others may be a great interest!” he announced.
“You’re more like a copy-book than I. There’s something after all that
holds us together.”
“Is it the idea of the harm I may do you?” Osmond asked.
“No; it’s the idea of the good I may do for you. It’s that,” Madame
Merle pursued, “that made me so jealous of Isabel. I want it to be
_my_ work,” she added, with her face, which had grown hard and bitter,
relaxing to its habit of smoothness.
Her friend took up his hat and his umbrella, and after giving the
former article two or three strokes with his coat-cuff, “On the whole, I
think,” he said, “you had better leave it to me.”
After he had left her she went, the first thing, and lifted from the
mantel-shelf the attenuated coffee-cup in which he had mentioned the
existence of a crack; but she looked at it rather abstractedly. “Have I
been so vile all for nothing?” she vaguely wailed.
CHAPTER L
As the Countess Gemini was not acquainted with the ancient monuments
Isabel occasionally offered to introduce her to these interesting relics
and to give their afternoon drive an antiquarian aim. The Countess, who
professed to think her sister-in-law a prodigy of learning, never made
an objection, and gazed at masses of Roman brickwork as patiently as if
they had been mounds of modern drapery. She had not the historic sense,
though she had in some directions the anecdotic, and as regards herself
the apologetic, but she was so delighted to be in Rome that she only
desired to float with the current. She would gladly have passed an hour
every day in the damp darkness of the Baths of Titus if it had been a
condition of her remaining at Palazzo Roccanera. Isabel, however, was
not a severe cicerone; she used to visit the ruins chiefly because they
offered an excuse for talking about other matters than the love affairs
of the ladies of Florence, as to which her companion was never weary
of offering information. It must be added that during these visits the
Countess forbade herself every form of active research; her preference
was to sit in the carriage and exclaim that everything was most
interesting. It was in this manner that she had hitherto examined the
Coliseum, to the infinite regret of her niece, who--with all the respect
that she owed her--could not see why she should not descend from the
vehicle and enter the building. Pansy had so little chance to ramble
that her view of the case was not wholly disinterested; it may be
divined that she had a secret hope that, once inside, her parents’ guest
might be induced to climb to the upper tiers. There came a day when
the Countess announced her willingness to undertake this feat--a mild
afternoon in March when the windy month expressed itself in occasional
puffs of spring. The three ladies went into the Coliseum together,
but Isabel left her companions to wander over the place. She had often
ascended to those desolate ledges from which the Roman crowd used to
bellow applause and where now the wild flowers (when they are allowed)
bloom in the deep crevices; and to-day she felt weary and disposed
to sit in the despoiled arena. It made an intermission too, for the
Countess often asked more from one’s attention than she gave in return;
and Isabel believed that when she was alone with her niece she let the
dust gather for a moment on the ancient scandals of the Arnide. She so
remained below therefore, while Pansy guided her undiscriminating aunt
to the steep brick staircase at the foot of which the custodian unlocks
the tall wooden gate. The great enclosure was half in shadow; the
western sun brought out the pale red tone of the great blocks of
travertine--the latent colour that is the only living element in the
immense ruin. Here and there wandered a peasant or a tourist, looking
up at the far sky-line where, in the clear stillness, a multitude of
swallows kept circling and plunging. Isabel presently became aware
that one of the other visitors, planted in the middle of the arena, had
turned his attention to her own person and was looking at her with
a certain little poise of the head which she had some weeks before
perceived to be characteristic of baffled but indestructible purpose.
Such an attitude, to-day, could belong only to Mr. Edward Rosier; and
this gentleman proved in fact to have been considering the question of
speaking to her. When he had assured himself that she was unaccompanied
he drew near, remarking that though she would not answer his letters
she would perhaps not wholly close her ears to his spoken eloquence. She
replied that her stepdaughter was close at hand and that she could only
give him five minutes; whereupon he took out his watch and sat down upon
a broken block.
“It’s very soon told,” said Edward Rosier. “I’ve sold all my bibelots!”
 Isabel gave instinctively an exclamation of horror; it was as if he had
told her he had had all his teeth drawn. “I’ve sold them by auction at
the Hôtel Drouot,” he went on. “The sale took place three days ago, and
they’ve telegraphed me the result. It’s magnificent.”
“I’m glad to hear it; but I wish you had kept your pretty things.”
“I have the money instead--fifty thousand dollars. Will Mr. Osmond think
me rich enough now?”
“Is it for that you did it?” Isabel asked gently.
“For what else in the world could it be? That’s the only thing I think
of. I went to Paris and made my arrangements. I couldn’t stop for the
sale; I couldn’t have seen them going off; I think it would have killed
me. But I put them into good hands, and they brought high prices. I
should tell you I have kept my enamels. Now I have the money in my
pocket, and he can’t say I’m poor!” the young man exclaimed defiantly.
“He’ll say now that you’re not wise,” said Isabel, as if Gilbert Osmond
had never said this before.
Rosier gave her a sharp look. “Do you mean that without my bibelots I’m
nothing? Do you mean they were the best thing about me? That’s what they
told me in Paris; oh they were very frank about it. But they hadn’t seen
<i>her</i>!”
“My dear friend, you deserve to succeed,” said Isabel very kindly.
“You say that so sadly that it’s the same as if you said I shouldn’t.”
 And he questioned her eyes with the clear trepidation of his own. He had
the air of a man who knows he has been the talk of Paris for a week and
is full half a head taller in consequence, but who also has a painful
suspicion that in spite of this increase of stature one or two persons
still have the perversity to think him diminutive. “I know what happened
here while I was away,” he went on; “What does Mr. Osmond expect after
she has refused Lord Warburton?”
Isabel debated. “That she’ll marry another nobleman.”
“What other nobleman?”
“One that he’ll pick out.”
Rosier slowly got up, putting his watch into his waistcoat-pocket.
“You’re laughing at some one, but this time I don’t think it’s at me.”
“I didn’t mean to laugh,” said Isabel. “I laugh very seldom. Now you had
better go away.”
“I feel very safe!” Rosier declared without moving. This might be; but
it evidently made him feel more so to make the announcement in rather
a loud voice, balancing himself a little complacently on his toes and
looking all round the Coliseum as if it were filled with an audience.
Suddenly Isabel saw him change colour; there was more of an audience
than he had suspected. She turned and perceived that her two companions
had returned from their excursion. “You must really go away,” she said
quickly. “Ah, my dear lady, pity me!” Edward Rosier murmured in a voice
strangely at variance with the announcement I have just quoted. And then
he added eagerly, like a man who in the midst of his misery is seized by
a happy thought: “Is that lady the Countess Gemini? I’ve a great desire
to be presented to her.”
Isabel looked at him a moment. “She has no influence with her brother.”
“Ah, what a monster you make him out!” And Rosier faced the Countess,
who advanced, in front of Pansy, with an animation partly due perhaps
to the fact that she perceived her sister-in-law to be engaged in
conversation with a very pretty young man.
“I’m glad you’ve kept your enamels!” Isabel called as she left him. She
went straight to Pansy, who, on seeing Edward Rosier, had stopped short,
with lowered eyes. “We’ll go back to the carriage,” she said gently.
“Yes, it’s getting late,” Pansy returned more gently still. And she
went on without a murmur, without faltering or glancing back. Isabel,
however, allowing herself this last liberty, saw that a meeting had
immediately taken place between the Countess and Mr. Rosier. He had
removed his hat and was bowing and smiling; he had evidently introduced
himself, while the Countess’s expressive back displayed to Isabel’s eye
a gracious inclination. These facts, none the less, were presently lost
to sight, for Isabel and Pansy took their places again in the carriage.
Pansy, who faced her stepmother, at first kept her eyes fixed on her
lap; then she raised them and rested them on Isabel’s. There shone out
of each of them a little melancholy ray--a spark of timid passion which
touched Isabel to the heart. At the same time a wave of envy passed over
her soul, as she compared the tremulous longing, the definite ideal
of the child with her own dry despair. “Poor little Pansy!” she
affectionately said.
“Oh never mind!” Pansy answered in the tone of eager apology. And then
there was a silence; the Countess was a long time coming. “Did you show
your aunt everything, and did she enjoy it?” Isabel asked at last.
“Yes, I showed her everything. I think she was very much pleased.”
“And you’re not tired, I hope.”
“Oh no, thank you, I’m not tired.”
The Countess still remained behind, so that Isabel requested the footman
to go into the Coliseum and tell her they were waiting. He presently
returned with the announcement that the Signora Contessa begged them not
to wait--she would come home in a cab!
About a week after this lady’s quick sympathies had enlisted themselves
with Mr. Rosier, Isabel, going rather late to dress for dinner, found
Pansy sitting in her room. The girl seemed to have been awaiting her;
she got up from her low chair. “Pardon my taking the liberty,” she said
in a small voice. “It will be the last--for some time.”
Her voice was strange, and her eyes, widely opened, had an excited,
frightened look. “You’re not going away!” Isabel exclaimed.
“I’m going to the convent.”
“To the convent?”
Pansy drew nearer, till she was near enough to put her arms round
Isabel and rest her head on her shoulder. She stood this way a moment,
perfectly still; but her companion could feel her tremble. The quiver
of her little body expressed everything she was unable to say. Isabel
nevertheless pressed her. “Why are you going to the convent?”
“Because papa thinks it best. He says a young girl’s better, every now
and then, for making a little retreat. He says the world, always the
world, is very bad for a young girl. This is just a chance for a little
seclusion--a little reflexion.” Pansy spoke in short detached sentences,
as if she could scarce trust herself; and then she added with a triumph
of self-control: “I think papa’s right; I’ve been so much in the world
this winter.”
Her announcement had a strange effect on Isabel; it seemed to carry a
larger meaning than the girl herself knew. “When was this decided?” she
asked. “I’ve heard nothing of it.”
“Papa told me half an hour ago; he thought it better it shouldn’t be
too much talked about in advance. Madame Catherine’s to come for me at a
quarter past seven, and I’m only to take two frocks. It’s only for a few
weeks; I’m sure it will be very good. I shall find all those ladies who
used to be so kind to me, and I shall see the little girls who are being
educated. I’m very fond of little girls,” said Pansy with an effect
of diminutive grandeur. “And I’m also very fond of Mother Catherine. I
shall be very quiet and think a great deal.”
Isabel listened to her, holding her breath; she was almost awe-struck.
“Think of _me_ sometimes.”
“Ah, come and see me soon!” cried Pansy; and the cry was very different
from the heroic remarks of which she had just delivered herself.
Isabel could say nothing more; she understood nothing; she only felt how
little she yet knew her husband. Her answer to his daughter was a long,
tender kiss.
Half an hour later she learned from her maid that Madame Catherine had
arrived in a cab and had departed again with the signorina. On going to
the drawing-room before dinner she found the Countess Gemini alone, and
this lady characterised the incident by exclaiming, with a wonderful
toss of the head, “_En voilà, ma chère, une pose!_” But if it was an
affectation she was at a loss to see what her husband affected. She
could only dimly perceive that he had more traditions than she supposed.
It had become her habit to be so careful as to what she said to him
that, strange as it may appear, she hesitated, for several minutes after
he had come in, to allude to his daughter’s sudden departure: she
spoke of it only after they were seated at table. But she had forbidden
herself ever to ask Osmond a question. All she could do was to make a
declaration, and there was one that came very naturally. “I shall miss
Pansy very much.”
He looked a while, with his head inclined a little, at the basket of
flowers in the middle of the table. “Ah yes,” he said at last, “I had
thought of that. You must go and see her, you know; but not too often. I
dare say you wonder why I sent her to the good sisters; but I doubt if I
can make you understand. It doesn’t matter; don’t trouble yourself about
it. That’s why I had not spoken of it. I didn’t believe you would enter
into it. But I’ve always had the idea; I’ve always thought it a part
of the education of one’s daughter. One’s daughter should be fresh and
fair; she should be innocent and gentle. With the manners of the present
time she is liable to become so dusty and crumpled. Pansy’s a little
dusty, a little dishevelled; she has knocked about too much. This
bustling, pushing rabble that calls itself society--one should take her
out of it occasionally. Convents are very quiet, very convenient, very
salutary. I like to think of her there, in the old garden, under
the arcade, among those tranquil virtuous women. Many of them are
gentlewomen born; several of them are noble. She will have her books
and her drawing, she will have her piano. I’ve made the most liberal
arrangements. There is to be nothing ascetic; there’s just to be a
certain little sense of sequestration. She’ll have time to think, and
there’s something I want her to think about.” Osmond spoke deliberately,
reasonably, still with his head on one side, as if he were looking at
the basket of flowers. His tone, however, was that of a man not so
much offering an explanation as putting a thing into words--almost into
pictures--to see, himself, how it would look. He considered a while the
picture he had evoked and seemed greatly pleased with it. And then he
went on: “The Catholics are very wise after all. The convent is a great
institution; we can’t do without it; it corresponds to an essential need
in families, in society. It’s a school of good manners; it’s a school
of repose. Oh, I don’t want to detach my daughter from the world,” he
added; “I don’t want to make her fix her thoughts on any other. This
one’s very well, as _she_ should take it, and she may think of it as much
as she likes. Only she must think of it in the right way.”
Isabel gave an extreme attention to this little sketch; she found
it indeed intensely interesting. It seemed to show her how far her
husband’s desire to be effective was capable of going--to the point of
playing theoretic tricks on the delicate organism of his daughter. She
could not understand his purpose, no--not wholly; but she understood it
better than he supposed or desired, inasmuch as she was convinced
that the whole proceeding was an elaborate mystification, addressed to
herself and destined to act upon her imagination. He had wanted to do
something sudden and arbitrary, something unexpected and refined; to
mark the difference between his sympathies and her own, and show that
if he regarded his daughter as a precious work of art it was natural
he should be more and more careful about the finishing touches. If he
wished to be effective he had succeeded; the incident struck a chill
into Isabel’s heart. Pansy had known the convent in her childhood and
had found a happy home there; she was fond of the good sisters, who were
very fond of her, and there was therefore for the moment no definite
hardship in her lot. But all the same the girl had taken fright; the
impression her father desired to make would evidently be sharp enough.
The old Protestant tradition had never faded from Isabel’s imagination,
and as her thoughts attached themselves to this striking example of
her husband’s genius--she sat looking, like him, at the basket of
flowers--poor little Pansy became the heroine of a tragedy. Osmond
wished it to be known that he shrank from nothing, and his wife found it
hard to pretend to eat her dinner. There was a certain relief presently,
in hearing the high, strained voice of her sister-in-law. The Countess
too, apparently, had been thinking the thing out, but had arrived at a
different conclusion from Isabel.
“It’s very absurd, my dear Osmond,” she said, “to invent so many pretty
reasons for poor Pansy’s banishment. Why don’t you say at once that you
want to get her out of my way? Haven’t you discovered that I think very
well of Mr. Rosier? I do indeed; he seems to me _simpaticissimo_. He has
made me believe in true love; I never did before! Of course you’ve
made up your mind that with those convictions I’m dreadful company for
Pansy.”
Osmond took a sip of a glass of wine; he looked perfectly good-humoured.
“My dear Amy,” he answered, smiling as if he were uttering a piece
of gallantry, “I don’t know anything about your convictions, but if
I suspected that they interfere with mine it would be much simpler to
banish _you_.”
CHAPTER LI
The Countess was not banished, but she felt the insecurity of her tenure
of her brother’s hospitality. A week after this incident Isabel received
a telegram from England, dated from Gardencourt and bearing the stamp of
Mrs. Touchett’s authorship. “Ralph cannot last many days,” it ran, “and
if convenient would like to see you. Wishes me to say that you must come
only if you’ve not other duties. Say, for myself, that you used to talk
a good deal about your duty and to wonder what it was; shall be curious
to see whether you’ve found it out. Ralph is really dying, and there’s
no other company.” Isabel was prepared for this news, having received
from Henrietta Stackpole a detailed account of her journey to England
with her appreciative patient. Ralph had arrived more dead than alive,
but she had managed to convey him to Gardencourt, where he had taken to
his bed, which, as Miss Stackpole wrote, he evidently would never leave
again. She added that she had really had two patients on her hands
instead of one, inasmuch as Mr. Goodwood, who had been of no earthly
use, was quite as ailing, in a different way, as Mr. Touchett.
Afterwards she wrote that she had been obliged to surrender the field to
Mrs. Touchett, who had just returned from America and had promptly given
her to understand that she didn’t wish any interviewing at Gardencourt.
Isabel had written to her aunt shortly after Ralph came to Rome, letting
her know of his critical condition and suggesting that she should
lose no time in returning to Europe. Mrs. Touchett had telegraphed an
acknowledgement of this admonition, and the only further news Isabel
received from her was the second telegram I have just quoted.
Isabel stood a moment looking at the latter missive; then, thrusting it
into her pocket, she went straight to the door of her husband’s study.
Here she again paused an instant, after which she opened the door and
went in. Osmond was seated at the table near the window with a folio
volume before him, propped against a pile of books. This volume was open
at a page of small coloured plates, and Isabel presently saw that he
had been copying from it the drawing of an antique coin. A box of
water-colours and fine brushes lay before him, and he had already
transferred to a sheet of immaculate paper the delicate, finely-tinted
disk. His back was turned toward the door, but he recognised his wife
without looking round.
“Excuse me for disturbing you,” she said.
“When I come to your room I always knock,” he answered, going on with
his work.
“I forgot; I had something else to think of. My cousin’s dying.”
“Ah, I don’t believe that,” said Osmond, looking at his drawing through
a magnifying glass. “He was dying when we married; he’ll outlive us
all.”
Isabel gave herself no time, no thought, to appreciate the careful
cynicism of this declaration; she simply went on quickly, full of
her own intention “My aunt has telegraphed for me; I must go to
Gardencourt.”
“Why must you go to Gardencourt?” Osmond asked in the tone of impartial
curiosity.
“To see Ralph before he dies.”
To this, for some time, he made no rejoinder; he continued to give his
chief attention to his work, which was of a sort that would brook no
negligence. “I don’t see the need of it,” he said at last. “He came to
see you here. I didn’t like that; I thought his being in Rome a great
mistake. But I tolerated it because it was to be the last time you
should see him. Now you tell me it’s not to have been the last. Ah,
you’re not grateful!”
“What am I to be grateful for?”
Gilbert Osmond laid down his little implements, blew a speck of dust
from his drawing, slowly got up, and for the first time looked at his
wife. “For my not having interfered while he was here.”
“Oh yes, I am. I remember perfectly how distinctly you let me know you
didn’t like it. I was very glad when he went away.”
“Leave him alone then. Don’t run after him.”
Isabel turned her eyes away from him; they rested upon his little
drawing. “I must go to England,” she said, with a full consciousness
that her tone might strike an irritable man of taste as stupidly
obstinate.
“I shall not like it if you do,” Osmond remarked.
“Why should I mind that? You won’t like it if I don’t. You like nothing
I do or don’t do. You pretend to think I lie.”
Osmond turned slightly pale; he gave a cold smile. “That’s why you must
go then? Not to see your cousin, but to take a revenge on me.”
“I know nothing about revenge.”
“I do,” said Osmond. “Don’t give me an occasion.”
“You’re only too eager to take one. You wish immensely that I would
commit some folly.”
“I should be gratified in that case if you disobeyed me.”
“If I disobeyed you?” said Isabel in a low tone which had the effect of
mildness.
“Let it be clear. If you leave Rome to-day it will be a piece of the
most deliberate, the most calculated, opposition.”
“How can you call it calculated? I received my aunt’s telegram but three
minutes ago.”
“You calculate rapidly; it’s a great accomplishment. I don’t see why we
should prolong our discussion; you know my wish.” And he stood there as
if he expected to see her withdraw.
But she never moved; she couldn’t move, strange as it may seem; she
still wished to justify herself; he had the power, in an extraordinary
degree, of making her feel this need. There was something in her
imagination he could always appeal to against her judgement. “You’ve no
reason for such a wish,” said Isabel, “and I’ve every reason for going.
I can’t tell you how unjust you seem to me. But I think you know. It’s
your own opposition that’s calculated. It’s malignant.”
She had never uttered her worst thought to her husband before, and the
sensation of hearing it was evidently new to Osmond. But he showed no
surprise, and his coolness was apparently a proof that he had believed
his wife would in fact be unable to resist for ever his ingenious
endeavour to draw her out. “It’s all the more intense then,” he
answered. And he added almost as if he were giving her a friendly
counsel: “This is a very important matter.” She recognised that; she
was fully conscious of the weight of the occasion; she knew that between
them they had arrived at a crisis. Its gravity made her careful; she
said nothing, and he went on. “You say I’ve no reason? I have the very
best. I dislike, from the bottom of my soul, what you intend to do. It’s
dishonourable; it’s indelicate; it’s indecent. Your cousin is nothing
whatever to me, and I’m under no obligation to make concessions to him.
I’ve already made the very handsomest. Your relations with him, while he
was here, kept me on pins and needles; but I let that pass, because from
week to week I expected him to go. I’ve never liked him and he has never
liked me. That’s why you like him--because he hates me,” said Osmond
with a quick, barely audible tremor in his voice. “I’ve an ideal of what
my wife should do and should not do. She should not travel across Europe
alone, in defiance of my deepest desire, to sit at the bedside of other
men. Your cousin’s nothing to you; he’s nothing to us. You smile most
expressively when I talk about _us_, but I assure you that _we_, _we_, Mrs.
Osmond, is all I know. I take our marriage seriously; you appear to
have found a way of not doing so. I’m not aware that we’re divorced or
separated; for me we’re indissolubly united. You are nearer to me than
any human creature, and I’m nearer to you. It may be a disagreeable
proximity; it’s one, at any rate, of our own deliberate making. You
don’t like to be reminded of that, I know; but I’m perfectly willing,
because--because--” And he paused a moment, looking as if he had
something to say which would be very much to the point. “Because I think
we should accept the consequences of our actions, and what I value most
in life is the honour of a thing!”
He spoke gravely and almost gently; the accent of sarcasm had dropped
out of his tone. It had a gravity which checked his wife’s quick
emotion; the resolution with which she had entered the room found itself
caught in a mesh of fine threads. His last words were not a command,
they constituted a kind of appeal; and, though she felt that any
expression of respect on his part could only be a refinement of egotism,
they represented something transcendent and absolute, like the sign
of the cross or the flag of one’s country. He spoke in the name of
something sacred and precious--the observance of a magnificent form.
They were as perfectly apart in feeling as two disillusioned lovers
had ever been; but they had never yet separated in act. Isabel had not
changed; her old passion for justice still abode within her; and now, in
the very thick of her sense of her husband’s blasphemous sophistry, it
began to throb to a tune which for a moment promised him the victory. It
came over her that in his wish to preserve appearances he was after
all sincere, and that this, as far as it went, was a merit. Ten minutes
before she had felt all the joy of irreflective action--a joy to which
she had so long been a stranger; but action had been suddenly changed to
slow renunciation, transformed by the blight of Osmond’s touch. If she
must renounce, however, she would let him know she was a victim rather
than a dupe. “I know you’re a master of the art of mockery,” she said.
“How can you speak of an indissoluble union--how can you speak of
your being contented? Where’s our union when you accuse me of falsity?
Where’s your contentment when you have nothing but hideous suspicion in
your heart?”
“It is in our living decently together, in spite of such drawbacks.”
“We don’t live decently together!” cried Isabel.
“Indeed we don’t if you go to England.”
“That’s very little; that’s nothing. I might do much more.”
He raised his eyebrows and even his shoulders a little: he had lived
long enough in Italy to catch this trick. “Ah, if you’ve come to
threaten me I prefer my drawing.” And he walked back to his table, where
he took up the sheet of paper on which he had been working and stood
studying it.
“I suppose that if I go you’ll not expect me to come back,” said Isabel.
He turned quickly round, and she could see this movement at least was
not designed. He looked at her a little, and then, “Are you out of your
mind?” he enquired.
“How can it be anything but a rupture?” she went on; “especially if all
you say is true?” She was unable to see how it could be anything but a
rupture; she sincerely wished to know what else it might be.
He sat down before his table. “I really can’t argue with you on the
hypothesis of your defying me,” he said. And he took up one of his
little brushes again.
She lingered but a moment longer; long enough to embrace with her eye
his whole deliberately indifferent yet most expressive figure; after
which she quickly left the room. Her faculties, her energy, her passion,
were all dispersed again; she felt as if a cold, dark mist had suddenly
encompassed her. Osmond possessed in a supreme degree the art of
eliciting any weakness. On her way back to her room she found the
Countess Gemini standing in the open doorway of a little parlour in
which a small collection of heterogeneous books had been arranged.
The Countess had an open volume in her hand; she appeared to have been
glancing down a page which failed to strike her as interesting. At the
sound of Isabel’s step she raised her head.
“Ah my dear,” she said, “you, who are so literary, do tell me some
amusing book to read! Everything here’s of a dreariness--! Do you think
this would do me any good?”
Isabel glanced at the title of the volume she held out, but without
reading or understanding it. “I’m afraid I can’t advise you. I’ve had
bad news. My cousin, Ralph Touchett, is dying.”
The Countess threw down her book. “Ah, he was so simpatico. I’m awfully
sorry for you.”
“You would be sorrier still if you knew.”
“What is there to know? You look very badly,” the Countess added. “You
must have been with Osmond.”
Half an hour before Isabel would have listened very coldly to an
intimation that she should ever feel a desire for the sympathy of
her sister-in-law, and there can be no better proof of her present
embarrassment than the fact that she almost clutched at this lady’s
fluttering attention. “I’ve been with Osmond,” she said, while the
Countess’s bright eyes glittered at her.
“I’m sure then he has been odious!” the Countess cried. “Did he say he
was glad poor Mr. Touchett’s dying?”
“He said it’s impossible I should go to England.”
The Countess’s mind, when her interests were concerned, was agile; she
already foresaw the extinction of any further brightness in her visit to
Rome. Ralph Touchett would die, Isabel would go into mourning, and then
there would be no more dinner-parties. Such a prospect produced for
a moment in her countenance an expressive grimace; but this rapid,
picturesque play of feature was her only tribute to disappointment.
After all, she reflected, the game was almost played out; she had
already overstayed her invitation. And then she cared enough for
Isabel’s trouble to forget her own, and she saw that Isabel’s trouble
was deep.
It seemed deeper than the mere death of a cousin, and the Countess had
no hesitation in connecting her exasperating brother with the expression
of her sister-in-law’s eyes. Her heart beat with an almost joyous
expectation, for if she had wished to see Osmond overtopped the
conditions looked favourable now. Of course if Isabel should go to
England she herself would immediately leave Palazzo Roccanera; nothing
would induce her to remain there with Osmond. Nevertheless she felt
an immense desire to hear that Isabel would go to England. “Nothing’s
impossible for you, my dear,” she said caressingly. “Why else are you
rich and clever and good?”
“Why indeed? I feel stupidly weak.”
“Why does Osmond say it’s impossible?” the Countess asked in a tone
which sufficiently declared that she couldn’t imagine.
From the moment she thus began to question her, however, Isabel drew
back; she disengaged her hand, which the Countess had affectionately
taken. But she answered this enquiry with frank bitterness. “Because
we’re so happy together that we can’t separate even for a fortnight.”
“Ah,” cried the Countess while Isabel turned away, “when I want to make
a journey my husband simply tells me I can have no money!”
Isabel went to her room, where she walked up and down for an hour. It
may appear to some readers that she gave herself much trouble, and it is
certain that for a woman of a high spirit she had allowed herself easily
to be arrested. It seemed to her that only now she fully measured the
great undertaking of matrimony. Marriage meant that in such a case as
this, when one had to choose, one chose as a matter of course for one’s
husband. “I’m afraid--yes, I’m afraid,” she said to herself more than
once, stopping short in her walk. But what she was afraid of was not her
husband--his displeasure, his hatred, his revenge; it was not even her
own later judgement of her conduct a consideration which had often held
her in check; it was simply the violence there would be in going when
Osmond wished her to remain. A gulf of difference had opened between
them, but nevertheless it was his desire that she should stay, it was
a horror to him that she should go. She knew the nervous fineness with
which he could feel an objection. What he thought of her she knew, what
he was capable of saying to her she had felt; yet they were married, for
all that, and marriage meant that a woman should cleave to the man with
whom, uttering tremendous vows, she had stood at the altar. She sank
down on her sofa at last and buried her head in a pile of cushions.
When she raised her head again the Countess Gemini hovered before her.
She had come in all unperceived; she had a strange smile on her thin
lips and her whole face had grown in an hour a shining intimation. She
lived assuredly, it might be said, at the window of her spirit, but now
she was leaning far out. “I knocked,” she began, “but you didn’t
answer me. So I ventured in. I’ve been looking at you for the past five
minutes. You’re very unhappy.”
“Yes; but I don’t think you can comfort me.”
“Will you give me leave to try?” And the Countess sat down on the
sofa beside her. She continued to smile, and there was something
communicative and exultant in her expression. She appeared to have
a deal to say, and it occurred to Isabel for the first time that her
sister-in-law might say something really human. She made play with her
glittering eyes, in which there was an unpleasant fascination. “After
all,” she soon resumed, “I must tell you, to begin with, that I don’t
understand your state of mind. You seem to have so many scruples, so
many reasons, so many ties. When I discovered, ten years ago, that my
husband’s dearest wish was to make me miserable--of late he has simply
let me alone--ah, it was a wonderful simplification! My poor Isabel,
you’re not simple enough.”
“No, I’m not simple enough,” said Isabel.
“There’s something I want you to know,” the Countess declared--“because
I think you ought to know it. Perhaps you do; perhaps you’ve guessed it.
But if you have, all I can say is that I understand still less why you
shouldn’t do as you like.”
“What do you wish me to know?” Isabel felt a foreboding that made her
heart beat faster. The Countess was about to justify herself, and this
alone was portentous.
But she was nevertheless disposed to play a little with her subject.
“In your place I should have guessed it ages ago. Have you never really
suspected?”
“I’ve guessed nothing. What should I have suspected? I don’t know what
you mean.”
“That’s because you’ve such a beastly pure mind. I never saw a woman
with such a pure mind!” cried the Countess.
Isabel slowly got up. “You’re going to tell me something horrible.”
“You can call it by whatever name you will!” And the Countess rose
also, while her gathered perversity grew vivid and dreadful. She stood
a moment in a sort of glare of intention and, as seemed to Isabel even
then, of ugliness; after which she said: “My first sister-in-law had no
children.”
Isabel stared back at her; the announcement was an anticlimax. “Your
first sister-in-law?”
“I suppose you know at least, if one may mention it, that Osmond has
been married before! I’ve never spoken to you of his wife; I thought it
mightn’t be decent or respectful. But others, less particular, must
have done so. The poor little woman lived hardly three years and died
childless. It wasn’t till after her death that Pansy arrived.”
Isabel’s brow had contracted to a frown; her lips were parted in pale,
vague wonder. She was trying to follow; there seemed so much more to
follow than she could see. “Pansy’s not my husband’s child then?”
“Your husband’s--in perfection! But no one else’s husband’s. Some one
else’s wife’s. Ah, my good Isabel,” cried the Countess, “with you one
must dot one’s i’s!”
“I don’t understand. Whose wife’s?” Isabel asked.
“The wife of a horrid little Swiss who died--how long?--a dozen, more
than fifteen, years ago. He never recognised Miss Pansy, nor, knowing
what he was about, would have anything to say to her; and there was no
reason why he should. Osmond did, and that was better; though he had to
fit on afterwards the whole rigmarole of his own wife’s having died in
childbirth, and of his having, in grief and horror, banished the little
girl from his sight for as long as possible before taking her home from
nurse. His wife had really died, you know, of quite another matter and
in quite another place: in the Piedmontese mountains, where they had
gone, one August, because her health appeared to require the air, but
where she was suddenly taken worse--fatally ill. The story passed,
sufficiently; it was covered by the appearances so long as nobody
heeded, as nobody cared to look into it. But of course I knew--without
researches,” the Countess lucidly proceeded; “as also, you’ll
understand, without a word said between us--I mean between Osmond and
me. Don’t you see him looking at me, in silence, that way, to settle
it?--that is to settle _me_ if I should say anything. I said nothing,
right or left--never a word to a creature, if you can believe that of
me: on my honour, my dear, I speak of the thing to you now, after all
this time, as I’ve never, never spoken. It was to be enough for me,
from the first, that the child was my niece--from the moment she was
my brother’s daughter. As for her veritable mother--!” But with this
Pansy’s wonderful aunt dropped--as, involuntarily, from the impression
of her sister-in-law’s face, out of which more eyes might have seemed to
look at her than she had ever had to meet.
She had spoken no name, yet Isabel could but check, on her own lips, an
echo of the unspoken. She sank to her seat again, hanging her head.
“Why have you told me this?” she asked in a voice the Countess hardly
recognised.
“Because I’ve been so bored with your not knowing. I’ve been bored,
frankly, my dear, with not having told you; as if, stupidly, all this
time I couldn’t have managed! _Ça me depasse_, if you don’t mind my saying
so, the things, all round you, that you’ve appeared to succeed in not
knowing. It’s a sort of assistance--aid to innocent ignorance--that
I’ve always been a bad hand at rendering; and in this connexion, that
of keeping quiet for my brother, my virtue has at any rate finally
found itself exhausted. It’s not a black lie, moreover, you know,” the
Countess inimitably added. “The facts are exactly what I tell you.”
“I had no idea,” said Isabel presently; and looked up at her in a manner
that doubtless matched the apparent witlessness of this confession.
“So I believed--though it was hard to believe. Had it never occurred to
you that he was for six or seven years her lover?”
“I don’t know. Things _have_ occurred to me, and perhaps that was what
they all meant.”
“She has been wonderfully clever, she has been magnificent, about
Pansy!” the Countess, before all this view of it, cried.
“Oh, no idea, for me,” Isabel went on, “ever _definitely_ took that form.”
 She appeared to be making out to herself what had been and what hadn’t.
“And as it is--I don’t understand.”
She spoke as one troubled and puzzled, yet the poor Countess seemed to
have seen her revelation fall below its possibilities of effect. She
had expected to kindle some responsive blaze, but had barely extracted a
spark. Isabel showed as scarce more impressed than she might have
been, as a young woman of approved imagination, with some fine sinister
passage of public history. “Don’t you recognise how the child could
never pass for _her_ husband’s?--that is with M. Merle himself,” her
companion resumed. “They had been separated too long for that, and he
had gone to some far country--I think to South America. If she had ever
had children--which I’m not sure of--she had lost them. The conditions
happened to make it workable, under stress (I mean at so awkward a
pinch), that Osmond should acknowledge the little girl. His wife was
dead--very true; but she had not been dead too long to put a certain
accommodation of dates out of the question--from the moment, I mean,
that suspicion wasn’t started; which was what they had to take care of.
What was more natural than that poor Mrs. Osmond, at a distance and
for a world not troubling about trifles, should have left behind her,
_poverina_, the pledge of her brief happiness that had cost her her life?
With the aid of a change of residence--Osmond had been living with her
at Naples at the time of their stay in the Alps, and he in due course
left it for ever--the whole history was successfully set going. My poor
sister-in-law, in her grave, couldn’t help herself, and the real mother,
to save _her_ skin, renounced all visible property in the child.”
“Ah, poor, poor woman!” cried Isabel, who herewith burst into tears. It
was a long time since she had shed any; she had suffered a high reaction
from weeping. But now they flowed with an abundance in which the
Countess Gemini found only another discomfiture.
“It’s very kind of you to pity her!” she discordantly laughed. “Yes
indeed, you have a way of your own--!”
“He must have been false to his wife--and so very soon!” said Isabel
with a sudden check.
“That’s all that’s wanting--that you should take up her cause!” the
Countess went on. “I quite agree with you, however, that it was much too
soon.”
“But to me, to me--?” And Isabel hesitated as if she had not heard; as
if her question--though it was sufficiently there in her eyes--were all
for herself.
“To you he has been faithful? Well, it depends, my dear, on what you
call faithful. When he married you he was no longer the lover of another
woman--_such_ a lover as he had been, _cara mia_, between their risks and
their precautions, while the thing lasted! That state of affairs had
passed away; the lady had repented, or at all events, for reasons of her
own, drawn back: she had always had, too, a worship of appearances
so intense that even Osmond himself had got bored with it. You may
therefore imagine what it was--when he couldn’t patch it on conveniently
to _any_ of those he goes in for! But the whole past was between them.”
“Yes,” Isabel mechanically echoed, “the whole past is between them.”
“Ah, this later past is nothing. But for six or seven years, as I say,
they had kept it up.”
She was silent a little. “Why then did she want him to marry me?”
“Ah my dear, that’s her superiority! Because you had money; and because
she believed you would be good to Pansy.”
“Poor woman--and Pansy who doesn’t like her!” cried Isabel.
“That’s the reason she wanted some one whom Pansy would like. She knows
it; she knows everything.”
“Will she know that you’ve told me this?”
“That will depend upon whether you tell her. She’s prepared for it, and
do you know what she counts upon for her defence? On your believing that
I lie. Perhaps you do; don’t make yourself uncomfortable to hide it.
Only, as it happens this time, I don’t. I’ve told plenty of little
idiotic fibs, but they’ve never hurt any one but myself.”
Isabel sat staring at her companion’s story as at a bale of fantastic
wares some strolling gypsy might have unpacked on the carpet at her
feet. “Why did Osmond never marry her?” she finally asked.
“Because she had no money.” The Countess had an answer for everything,
and if she lied she lied well. “No one knows, no one has ever known,
what she lives on, or how she has got all those beautiful things. I
don’t believe Osmond himself knows. Besides, she wouldn’t have married
him.”
“How can she have loved him then?”
“She doesn’t love him in that way. She did at first, and then, I
suppose, she would have married him; but at that time her husband was
living. By the time M. Merle had rejoined--I won’t say his ancestors,
because he never had any--her relations with Osmond had changed, and she
had grown more ambitious. Besides, she has never had, about him,”
 the Countess went on, leaving Isabel to wince for it so tragically
afterwards--“she _had_ never had, what you might call any illusions of
_intelligence_. She hoped she might marry a great man; that has always
been her idea. She has waited and watched and plotted and prayed; but
she has never succeeded. I don’t call Madame Merle a success, you know.
I don’t know what she may accomplish yet, but at present she has very
little to show. The only tangible result she has ever achieved--except,
of course, getting to know every one and staying with them free of
expense--has been her bringing you and Osmond together. Oh, she did
that, my dear; you needn’t look as if you doubted it. I’ve watched
them for years; I know everything--everything. I’m thought a great
scatterbrain, but I’ve had enough application of mind to follow up those
two. She hates me, and her way of showing it is to pretend to be for
ever defending me. When people say I’ve had fifteen lovers she looks
horrified and declares that quite half of them were never proved. She
has been afraid of me for years, and she has taken great comfort in the
vile, false things people have said about me. She has been afraid I’d
expose her, and she threatened me one day when Osmond began to pay his
court to you. It was at his house in Florence; do you remember that
afternoon when she brought you there and we had tea in the garden? She
let me know then that if I should tell tales two could play at that
game. She pretends there’s a good deal more to tell about me than about
her. It would be an interesting comparison! I don’t care a fig what she
may say, simply because I know _you_ don’t care a fig. You can’t trouble
your head about me less than you do already. So she may take her revenge
as she chooses; I don’t think she’ll frighten you very much. Her great
idea has been to be tremendously irreproachable--a kind of full-blown
lily--the incarnation of propriety. She has always worshipped that god.
There should be no scandal about Caesar’s wife, you know; and, as I say,
she has always hoped to marry Caesar. That was one reason she wouldn’t
marry Osmond; the fear that on seeing her with Pansy people would put
things together--would even see a resemblance. She has had a terror
lest the mother should betray herself. She has been awfully careful; the
mother has never done so.”
“Yes, yes, the mother has done so,” said Isabel, who had listened to
all this with a face more and more wan. “She betrayed herself to me the
other day, though I didn’t recognise her. There appeared to have been a
chance of Pansy’s making a great marriage, and in her disappointment at
its not coming off she almost dropped the mask.”
“Ah, that’s where she’d dish herself!” cried the Countess. “She has
failed so dreadfully that she’s determined her daughter shall make it
up.”
Isabel started at the words “her daughter,” which her guest threw off
so familiarly. “It seems very wonderful,” she murmured; and in this
bewildering impression she had almost lost her sense of being personally
touched by the story.
“Now don’t go and turn against the poor innocent child!” the Countess
went on. “She’s very nice, in spite of her deplorable origin. I myself
have liked Pansy; not, naturally, because she was hers, but because she
had become yours.”
“Yes, she has become mine. And how the poor woman must have suffered at
seeing me--!” Isabel exclaimed while she flushed at the thought.
“I don’t believe she has suffered; on the contrary, she has enjoyed.
Osmond’s marriage has given his daughter a great little lift. Before
that she lived in a hole. And do you know what the mother thought? That
you might take such a fancy to the child that you’d do something for
her. Osmond of course could never give her a portion. Osmond was really
extremely poor; but of course you know all about that. Ah, my dear,”
 cried the Countess, “why did you ever inherit money?” She stopped a
moment as if she saw something singular in Isabel’s face. “Don’t tell
me now that you’ll give her a dot. You’re capable of that, but I would
refuse to believe it. Don’t try to be too good. Be a little easy and
natural and nasty; feel a little wicked, for the comfort of it, once in
your life!”
“It’s very strange. I suppose I ought to know, but I’m sorry,” Isabel
said. “I’m much obliged to you.”
“Yes, you seem to be!” cried the Countess with a mocking laugh.
“Perhaps you are--perhaps you’re not. You don’t take it as I should have
thought.”
“How should I take it?” Isabel asked.
“Well, I should say as a woman who has been made use of.” Isabel made
no answer to this; she only listened, and the Countess went on. “They’ve
always been bound to each other; they remained so even after she broke
off--or _he_ did. But he has always been more for her than she has been
for him. When their little carnival was over they made a bargain that
each should give the other complete liberty, but that each should also
do everything possible to help the other on. You may ask me how I know
such a thing as that. I know it by the way they’ve behaved. Now see how
much better women are than men! She has found a wife for Osmond, but
Osmond has never lifted a little finger for _her_. She has worked for him,
plotted for him, suffered for him; she has even more than once found
money for him; and the end of it is that he’s tired of her. She’s an old
habit; there are moments when he needs her, but on the whole he wouldn’t
miss her if she were removed. And, what’s more, to-day she knows it. So
you needn’t be jealous!” the Countess added humorously.
Isabel rose from her sofa again; she felt bruised and scant of breath;
her head was humming with new knowledge. “I’m much obliged to you,” she
repeated. And then she added abruptly, in quite a different tone: “How
do you know all this?”
This enquiry appeared to ruffle the Countess more than Isabel’s
expression of gratitude pleased her. She gave her companion a bold
stare, with which, “Let us assume that I’ve invented it!” she cried. She
too, however, suddenly changed her tone and, laying her hand on Isabel’s
arm, said with the penetration of her sharp bright smile: “Now will you
give up your journey?”
Isabel started a little; she turned away. But she felt weak and in a
moment had to lay her arm upon the mantel-shelf for support. She stood a
minute so, and then upon her arm she dropped her dizzy head, with closed
eyes and pale lips.
“I’ve done wrong to speak--I’ve made you ill!” the Countess cried.
“Ah, I must see Ralph!” Isabel wailed; not in resentment, not in
the quick passion her companion had looked for; but in a tone of
far-reaching, infinite sadness.
CHAPTER LII
There was a train for Turin and Paris that evening; and after the
Countess had left her Isabel had a rapid and decisive conference with
her maid, who was discreet, devoted and active. After this she thought
(except of her journey) only of one thing. She must go and see Pansy;
from her she couldn’t turn away. She had not seen her yet, as Osmond had
given her to understand that it was too soon to begin. She drove at five
o’clock to a high floor in a narrow street in the quarter of the Piazza
Navona, and was admitted by the portress of the convent, a genial and
obsequious person. Isabel had been at this institution before; she had
come with Pansy to see the sisters. She knew they were good women,
and she saw that the large rooms were clean and cheerful and that
the well-used garden had sun for winter and shade for spring. But she
disliked the place, which affronted and almost frightened her; not for
the world would she have spent a night there. It produced to-day more
than before the impression of a well-appointed prison; for it was not
possible to pretend Pansy was free to leave it. This innocent creature
had been presented to her in a new and violent light, but the secondary
effect of the revelation was to make her reach out a hand.
The portress left her to wait in the parlour of the convent while she
went to make it known that there was a visitor for the dear young lady.
The parlour was a vast, cold apartment, with new-looking furniture; a
large clean stove of white porcelain, unlighted, a collection of wax
flowers under glass, and a series of engravings from religious pictures
on the walls. On the other occasion Isabel had thought it less like Rome
than like Philadelphia, but to-day she made no reflexions; the apartment
only seemed to her very empty and very soundless. The portress returned
at the end of some five minutes, ushering in another person. Isabel got
up, expecting to see one of the ladies of the sisterhood, but to her
extreme surprise found herself confronted with Madame Merle. The effect
was strange, for Madame Merle was already so present to her vision
that her appearance in the flesh was like suddenly, and rather awfully,
seeing a painted picture move. Isabel had been thinking all day of her
falsity, her audacity, her ability, her probable suffering; and these
dark things seemed to flash with a sudden light as she entered the
room. Her being there at all had the character of ugly evidence, of
handwritings, of profaned relics, of grim things produced in court. It
made Isabel feel faint; if it had been necessary to speak on the spot
she would have been quite unable. But no such necessity was distinct to
her; it seemed to her indeed that she had absolutely nothing to say to
Madame Merle. In one’s relations with this lady, however, there were
never any absolute necessities; she had a manner which carried off
not only her own deficiencies but those of other people. But she was
different from usual; she came in slowly, behind the portress, and
Isabel instantly perceived that she was not likely to depend upon her
habitual resources. For her too the occasion was exceptional, and she
had undertaken to treat it by the light of the moment. This gave her a
peculiar gravity; she pretended not even to smile, and though Isabel saw
that she was more than ever playing a part it seemed to her that on the
whole the wonderful woman had never been so natural. She looked at her
young friend from head to foot, but not harshly nor defiantly; with a
cold gentleness rather, and an absence of any air of allusion to their
last meeting. It was as if she had wished to mark a distinction. She had
been irritated then, she was reconciled now.
“You can leave us alone,” she said to the portress; “in five minutes
this lady will ring for you.” And then she turned to Isabel, who, after
noting what has just been mentioned, had ceased to notice and had let
her eyes wander as far as the limits of the room would allow. She wished
never to look at Madame Merle again. “You’re surprised to find me here,
and I’m afraid you’re not pleased,” this lady went on. “You don’t see
why I should have come; it’s as if I had anticipated you. I confess I’ve
been rather indiscreet--I ought to have asked your permission.” There
was none of the oblique movement of irony in this; it was said simply
and mildly; but Isabel, far afloat on a sea of wonder and pain, could
not have told herself with what intention it was uttered. “But I’ve not
been sitting long,” Madame Merle continued; “that is I’ve not been long
with Pansy. I came to see her because it occurred to me this afternoon
that she must be rather lonely and perhaps even a little miserable.
It may be good for a small girl; I know so little about small girls; I
can’t tell. At any rate it’s a little dismal. Therefore I came--on the
chance. I knew of course that you’d come, and her father as well;
still, I had not been told other visitors were forbidden. The good
woman--what’s her name? Madame Catherine--made no objection whatever. I
stayed twenty minutes with Pansy; she has a charming little room, not
in the least conventual, with a piano and flowers. She has arranged
it delightfully; she has so much taste. Of course it’s all none of my
business, but I feel happier since I’ve seen her. She may even have a
maid if she likes; but of course she has no occasion to dress. She wears
a little black frock; she looks so charming. I went afterwards to see
Mother Catherine, who has a very good room too; I assure you I don’t
find the poor sisters at all monastic. Mother Catherine has a most
coquettish little toilet-table, with something that looked uncommonly
like a bottle of eau-de-Cologne. She speaks delightfully of Pansy; says
it’s a great happiness for them to have her. She’s a little saint of
heaven and a model to the oldest of them. Just as I was leaving Madame
Catherine the portress came to say to her that there was a lady for the
signorina. Of course I knew it must be you, and I asked her to let me
go and receive you in her place. She demurred greatly--I must tell you
that--and said it was her duty to notify the Mother Superior; it was
of such high importance that you should be treated with respect. I
requested her to let the Mother Superior alone and asked her how she
supposed I would treat you!”
So Madame Merle went on, with much of the brilliancy of a woman who had
long been a mistress of the art of conversation. But there were phases
and gradations in her speech, not one of which was lost upon Isabel’s
ear, though her eyes were absent from her companion’s face. She had not
proceeded far before Isabel noted a sudden break in her voice, a lapse
in her continuity, which was in itself a complete drama. This subtle
modulation marked a momentous discovery--the perception of an entirely
new attitude on the part of her listener. Madame Merle had guessed in
the space of an instant that everything was at end between them, and in
the space of another instant she had guessed the reason why. The person
who stood there was not the same one she had seen hitherto, but was a
very different person--a person who knew her secret. This discovery was
tremendous, and from the moment she made it the most accomplished of
women faltered and lost her courage. But only for that moment. Then the
conscious stream of her perfect manner gathered itself again and flowed
on as smoothly as might be to the end. But it was only because she had
the end in view that she was able to proceed. She had been touched with
a point that made her quiver, and she needed all the alertness of her
will to repress her agitation. Her only safety was in her not betraying
herself. She resisted this, but the startled quality of her voice
refused to improve--she couldn’t help it--while she heard herself say
she hardly knew what. The tide of her confidence ebbed, and she was able
only just to glide into port, faintly grazing the bottom.
Isabel saw it all as distinctly as if it had been reflected in a large
clear glass. It might have been a great moment for her, for it might
have been a moment of triumph. That Madame Merle had lost her pluck and
saw before her the phantom of exposure--this in itself was a revenge,
this in itself was almost the promise of a brighter day. And for a
moment during which she stood apparently looking out of the window, with
her back half-turned, Isabel enjoyed that knowledge. On the other side
of the window lay the garden of the convent; but this is not what she
saw; she saw nothing of the budding plants and the glowing afternoon.
She saw, in the crude light of that revelation which had already become
a part of experience and to which the very frailty of the vessel in
which it had been offered her only gave an intrinsic price, the dry
staring fact that she had been an applied handled hung-up tool,
as senseless and convenient as mere shaped wood and iron. All the
bitterness of this knowledge surged into her soul again; it was as if
she felt on her lips the taste of dishonour. There was a moment during
which, if she had turned and spoken, she would have said something that
would hiss like a lash. But she closed her eyes, and then the hideous
vision dropped. What remained was the cleverest woman in the world
standing there within a few feet of her and knowing as little what to
think as the meanest. Isabel’s only revenge was to be silent still--to
leave Madame Merle in this unprecedented situation. She left her there
for a period that must have seemed long to this lady, who at last
seated herself with a movement which was in itself a confession of
helplessness. Then Isabel turned slow eyes, looking down at her. Madame
Merle was very pale; her own eyes covered Isabel’s face. She might see
what she would, but her danger was over. Isabel would never accuse
her, never reproach her; perhaps because she never would give her the
opportunity to defend herself.
“I’m come to bid Pansy good-bye,” our young woman said at last. “I go to
England to-night.”
“Go to England to-night!” Madame Merle repeated sitting there and
looking up at her.
“I’m going to Gardencourt. Ralph Touchett’s dying.”
“Ah, you’ll feel that.” Madame Merle recovered herself; she had a chance
to express sympathy. “Do you go alone?”
“Yes; without my husband.”
Madame Merle gave a low vague murmur; a sort of recognition of the
general sadness of things. “Mr. Touchett never liked me, but I’m sorry
he’s dying. Shall you see his mother?”
“Yes; she has returned from America.”
“She used to be very kind to me; but she has changed. Others too have
changed,” said Madame Merle with a quiet noble pathos. She paused a
moment, then added: “And you’ll see dear old Gardencourt again!”
“I shall not enjoy it much,” Isabel answered.
“Naturally--in your grief. But it’s on the whole, of all the houses I
know, and I know many, the one I should have liked best to live in. I
don’t venture to send a message to the people,” Madame Merle added; “but
I should like to give my love to the place.”
Isabel turned away. “I had better go to Pansy. I’ve not much time.”
While she looked about her for the proper egress, the door opened and
admitted one of the ladies of the house, who advanced with a discreet
smile, gently rubbing, under her long loose sleeves, a pair of plump
white hands. Isabel recognised Madame Catherine, whose acquaintance she
had already made, and begged that she would immediately let her see Miss
Osmond. Madame Catherine looked doubly discreet, but smiled very blandly
and said: “It will be good for her to see you. I’ll take you to her
myself.” Then she directed her pleased guarded vision to Madame Merle.
“Will you let me remain a little?” this lady asked. “It’s so good to be
here.”
“You may remain always if you like!” And the good sister gave a knowing
laugh.
She led Isabel out of the room, through several corridors, and up a long
staircase. All these departments were solid and bare, light and clean;
so, thought Isabel, are the great penal establishments. Madame Catherine
gently pushed open the door of Pansy’s room and ushered in the visitor;
then stood smiling with folded hands while the two others met and
embraced.
“She’s glad to see you,” she repeated; “it will do her good.” And she
placed the best chair carefully for Isabel. But she made no movement
to seat herself; she seemed ready to retire. “How does this dear child
look?” she asked of Isabel, lingering a moment.
“She looks pale,” Isabel answered.
“That’s the pleasure of seeing you. She’s very happy. _Elle éclaire la
maison_,” said the good sister.
Pansy wore, as Madame Merle had said, a little black dress; it was
perhaps this that made her look pale. “They’re very good to me--they
think of everything!” she exclaimed with all her customary eagerness to
accommodate.
“We think of you always--you’re a precious charge,” Madame Catherine
remarked in the tone of a woman with whom benevolence was a habit and
whose conception of duty was the acceptance of every care. It fell with
a leaden weight on Isabel’s ears; it seemed to represent the surrender
of a personality, the authority of the Church.
When Madame Catherine had left them together Pansy kneeled down and hid
her head in her stepmother’s lap. So she remained some moments, while
Isabel gently stroked her hair. Then she got up, averting her face and
looking about the room. “Don’t you think I’ve arranged it well? I’ve
everything I have at home.”
“It’s very pretty; you’re very comfortable.” Isabel scarcely knew what
she could say to her. On the one hand she couldn’t let her think she had
come to pity her, and on the other it would be a dull mockery to pretend
to rejoice with her. So she simply added after a moment: “I’ve come to
bid you good-bye. I’m going to England.”
Pansy’s white little face turned red. “To England! Not to come back?”
“I don’t know when I shall come back.”
“Ah, I’m sorry,” Pansy breathed with faintness. She spoke as if she had
no right to criticise; but her tone expressed a depth of disappointment.
“My cousin, Mr. Touchett, is very ill; he’ll probably die. I wish to see
him,” Isabel said.
“Ah yes; you told me he would die. Of course you must go. And will papa
go?”
“No; I shall go alone.”
For a moment the girl said nothing. Isabel had often wondered what she
thought of the apparent relations of her father with his wife; but never
by a glance, by an intimation, had she let it be seen that she deemed
them deficient in an air of intimacy. She made her reflexions, Isabel
was sure; and she must have had a conviction that there were husbands
and wives who were more intimate than that. But Pansy was not indiscreet
even in thought; she would as little have ventured to judge her gentle
stepmother as to criticise her magnificent father. Her heart may have
stood almost as still as it would have done had she seen two of the
saints in the great picture in the convent chapel turn their painted
heads and shake them at each other. But as in this latter case she would
(for very solemnity’s sake) never have mentioned the awful phenomenon,
so she put away all knowledge of the secrets of larger lives than her
own. “You’ll be very far away,” she presently went on.
“Yes; I shall be far away. But it will scarcely matter,” Isabel
explained; “since so long as you’re here I can’t be called near you.”
“Yes, but you can come and see me; though you’ve not come very often.”
“I’ve not come because your father forbade it. To-day I bring nothing
with me. I can’t amuse you.”
“I’m not to be amused. That’s not what papa wishes.”
“Then it hardly matters whether I’m in Rome or in England.”
“You’re not happy, Mrs. Osmond,” said Pansy.
“Not very. But it doesn’t matter.”
“That’s what I say to myself. What does it matter? But I should like to
come out.”
“I wish indeed you might.”
“Don’t leave me here,” Pansy went on gently.
Isabel said nothing for a minute; her heart beat fast. “Will you come
away with me now?” she asked.
Pansy looked at her pleadingly. “Did papa tell you to bring me?”
“No; it’s my own proposal.”
“I think I had better wait then. Did papa send me no message?”
“I don’t think he knew I was coming.”
“He thinks I’ve not had enough,” said Pansy. “But I have. The ladies are
very kind to me and the little girls come to see me. There are some
very little ones--such charming children. Then my room--you can see for
yourself. All that’s very delightful. But I’ve had enough. Papa wished
me to think a little--and I’ve thought a great deal.”
“What have you thought?”
“Well, that I must never displease papa.”
“You knew that before.”
“Yes; but I know it better. I’ll do anything--I’ll do anything,” said
Pansy. Then, as she heard her own words, a deep, pure blush came into
her face. Isabel read the meaning of it; she saw the poor girl had been
vanquished. It was well that Mr. Edward Rosier had kept his enamels!
Isabel looked into her eyes and saw there mainly a prayer to be treated
easily. She laid her hand on Pansy’s as if to let her know that her
look conveyed no diminution of esteem; for the collapse of the girl’s
momentary resistance (mute and modest thought it had been) seemed only
her tribute to the truth of things. She didn’t presume to judge others,
but she had judged herself; she had seen the reality. She had no
vocation for struggling with combinations; in the solemnity of
sequestration there was something that overwhelmed her. She bowed her
pretty head to authority and only asked of authority to be merciful.
Yes; it was very well that Edward Rosier had reserved a few articles!
Isabel got up; her time was rapidly shortening. “Good-bye then. I leave
Rome to-night.”
Pansy took hold of her dress; there was a sudden change in the child’s
face. “You look strange, you frighten me.”
“Oh, I’m very harmless,” said Isabel.
“Perhaps you won’t come back?”
“Perhaps not. I can’t tell.”
“Ah, Mrs. Osmond, you won’t leave me!”
Isabel now saw she had guessed everything. “My dear child, what can I do
for you?” she asked.
“I don’t know--but I’m happier when I think of you.”
“You can always think of me.”
“Not when you’re so far. I’m a little afraid,” said Pansy.
“What are you afraid of?”
“Of papa--a little. And of Madame Merle. She has just been to see me.”
“You must not say that,” Isabel observed.
“Oh, I’ll do everything they want. Only if you’re here I shall do it
more easily.”
Isabel considered. “I won’t desert you,” she said at last. “Good-bye, my
child.”
Then they held each other a moment in a silent embrace, like two
sisters; and afterwards Pansy walked along the corridor with her visitor
to the top of the staircase. “Madame Merle has been here,” she remarked
as they went; and as Isabel answered nothing she added abruptly: “I
don’t like Madame Merle!”
Isabel hesitated, then stopped. “You must never say that--that you don’t
like Madame Merle.”
Pansy looked at her in wonder; but wonder with Pansy had never been a
reason for non-compliance. “I never will again,” she said with exquisite
gentleness. At the top of the staircase they had to separate, as it
appeared to be part of the mild but very definite discipline under which
Pansy lived that she should not go down. Isabel descended, and when she
reached the bottom the girl was standing above. “You’ll come back?” she
called out in a voice that Isabel remembered afterwards.
“Yes--I’ll come back.”
Madame Catherine met Mrs. Osmond below and conducted her to the door of
the parlour, outside of which the two stood talking a minute. “I won’t
go in,” said the good sister. “Madame Merle’s waiting for you.”
At this announcement Isabel stiffened; she was on the point of asking
if there were no other egress from the convent. But a moment’s reflexion
assured her that she would do well not to betray to the worthy nun her
desire to avoid Pansy’s other friend. Her companion grasped her arm
very gently and, fixing her a moment with wise, benevolent eyes, said
in French and almost familiarly: “_Eh bien, chère Madame, qu’en
pensez-vous?_”
“About my step-daughter? Oh, it would take long to tell you.”
“We think it’s enough,” Madame Catherine distinctly observed. And she
pushed open the door of the parlour.
Madame Merle was sitting just as Isabel had left her, like a woman so
absorbed in thought that she had not moved a little finger. As Madame
Catherine closed the door she got up, and Isabel saw that she had been
thinking to some purpose. She had recovered her balance; she was in full
possession of her resources. “I found I wished to wait for you,” she
said urbanely. “But it’s not to talk about Pansy.”
Isabel wondered what it could be to talk about, and in spite of Madame
Merle’s declaration she answered after a moment: “Madame Catherine says
it’s enough.”
“Yes; it also seems to me enough. I wanted to ask you another word about
poor Mr. Touchett,” Madame Merle added. “Have you reason to believe that
he’s really at his last?”
“I’ve no information but a telegram. Unfortunately it only confirms a
probability.”
“I’m going to ask you a strange question,” said Madame Merle. “Are
you very fond of your cousin?” And she gave a smile as strange as her
utterance.
“Yes, I’m very fond of him. But I don’t understand you.”
She just hung fire. “It’s rather hard to explain. Something has occurred
to me which may not have occurred to you, and I give you the benefit
of my idea. Your cousin did you once a great service. Have you never
guessed it?”
“He has done me many services.”
“Yes; but one was much above the rest. He made you a rich woman.”
“_He_ made me--?”
Madame Merle appearing to see herself successful, she went on more
triumphantly: “He imparted to you that extra lustre which was required
to make you a brilliant match. At bottom it’s him you’ve to thank.” She
stopped; there was something in Isabel’s eyes.
“I don’t understand you. It was my uncle’s money.”
“Yes; it was your uncle’s money, but it was your cousin’s idea. He
brought his father over to it. Ah, my dear, the sum was large!”
Isabel stood staring; she seemed to-day to live in a world illumined by
lurid flashes. “I don’t know why you say such things. I don’t know what
you know.”
“I know nothing but what I’ve guessed. But I’ve guessed that.”
Isabel went to the door and, when she had opened it, stood a moment
with her hand on the latch. Then she said--it was her only revenge: “I
believed it was you I had to thank!”
Madame Merle dropped her eyes; she stood there in a kind of proud
penance. “You’re very unhappy, I know. But I’m more so.”
“Yes; I can believe that. I think I should like never to see you again.”
Madame Merle raised her eyes. “I shall go to America,” she quietly
remarked while Isabel passed out.
CHAPTER LIII
It was not with surprise, it was with a feeling which in other
circumstances would have had much of the effect of joy, that as Isabel
descended from the Paris Mail at Charing Cross she stepped into the
arms, as it were--or at any rate into the hands--of Henrietta Stackpole.
She had telegraphed to her friend from Turin, and though she had not
definitely said to herself that Henrietta would meet her, she had felt
her telegram would produce some helpful result. On her long journey from
Rome her mind had been given up to vagueness; she was unable to question
the future. She performed this journey with sightless eyes and took
little pleasure in the countries she traversed, decked out though they
were in the richest freshness of spring. Her thoughts followed their
course through other countries--strange-looking, dimly-lighted, pathless
lands, in which there was no change of seasons, but only, as it seemed,
a perpetual dreariness of winter. She had plenty to think about; but
it was neither reflexion nor conscious purpose that filled her mind.
Disconnected visions passed through it, and sudden dull gleams of
memory, of expectation. The past and the future came and went at their
will, but she saw them only in fitful images, which rose and fell by a
logic of their own. It was extraordinary the things she remembered. Now
that she was in the secret, now that she knew something that so much
concerned her and the eclipse of which had made life resemble an attempt
to play whist with an imperfect pack of cards, the truth of things,
their mutual relations, their meaning, and for the most part their
horror, rose before her with a kind of architectural vastness. She
remembered a thousand trifles; they started to life with the spontaneity
of a shiver. She had thought them trifles at the time; now she saw that
they had been weighted with lead. Yet even now they were trifles after
all, for of what use was it to her to understand them? Nothing seemed of
use to her to-day. All purpose, all intention, was suspended; all
desire too save the single desire to reach her much-embracing refuge.
Gardencourt had been her starting-point, and to those muffled chambers
it was at least a temporary solution to return. She had gone forth in
her strength; she would come back in her weakness, and if the place had
been a rest to her before, it would be a sanctuary now. She envied Ralph
his dying, for if one were thinking of rest that was the most perfect
of all. To cease utterly, to give it all up and not know anything
more--this idea was as sweet as the vision of a cool bath in a marble
tank, in a darkened chamber, in a hot land.
She had moments indeed in her journey from Rome which were almost as
good as being dead. She sat in her corner, so motionless, so passive,
simply with the sense of being carried, so detached from hope and
regret, that she recalled to herself one of those Etruscan figures
couched upon the receptacle of their ashes. There was nothing to regret
now--that was all over. Not only the time of her folly, but the time of
her repentance was far. The only thing to regret was that Madame Merle
had been so--well, so unimaginable. Just here her intelligence dropped,
from literal inability to say what it was that Madame Merle had been.
Whatever it was it was for Madame Merle herself to regret it; and
doubtless she would do so in America, where she had announced she was
going. It concerned Isabel no more; she only had an impression that she
should never again see Madame Merle. This impression carried her into
the future, of which from time to time she had a mutilated glimpse. She
saw herself, in the distant years, still in the attitude of a woman who
had her life to live, and these intimations contradicted the spirit of
the present hour. It might be desirable to get quite away, really away,
further away than little grey-green England, but this privilege was
evidently to be denied her. Deep in her soul--deeper than any appetite
for renunciation--was the sense that life would be her business for a
long time to come. And at moments there was something inspiring, almost
enlivening, in the conviction. It was a proof of strength--it was a
proof she should some day be happy again. It couldn’t be she was to live
only to suffer; she was still young, after all, and a great many things
might happen to her yet. To live only to suffer--only to feel the injury
of life repeated and enlarged--it seemed to her she was too valuable,
too capable, for that. Then she wondered if it were vain and stupid
to think so well of herself. When had it even been a guarantee to be
valuable? Wasn’t all history full of the destruction of precious things?
Wasn’t it much more probable that if one were fine one would suffer? It
involved then perhaps an admission that one had a certain grossness; but
Isabel recognised, as it passed before her eyes, the quick vague shadow
of a long future. She should never escape; she should last to the end.
Then the middle years wrapped her about again and the grey curtain of
her indifference closed her in.
Henrietta kissed her, as Henrietta usually kissed, as if she were afraid
she should be caught doing it; and then Isabel stood there in the crowd,
looking about her, looking for her servant. She asked nothing; she
wished to wait. She had a sudden perception that she should be helped.
She rejoiced Henrietta had come; there was something terrible in an
arrival in London. The dusky, smoky, far-arching vault of the station,
the strange, livid light, the dense, dark, pushing crowd, filled her
with a nervous fear and made her put her arm into her friend’s. She
remembered she had once liked these things; they seemed part of a mighty
spectacle in which there was something that touched her. She remembered
how she walked away from Euston, in the winter dusk, in the crowded
streets, five years before. She could not have done that to-day, and the
incident came before her as the deed of another person.
“It’s too beautiful that you should have come,” said Henrietta, looking
at her as if she thought Isabel might be prepared to challenge the
proposition. “If you hadn’t--if you hadn’t; well, I don’t know,”
 remarked Miss Stackpole, hinting ominously at her powers of disapproval.
Isabel looked about without seeing her maid. Her eyes rested on another
figure, however, which she felt she had seen before; and in a moment
she recognised the genial countenance of Mr. Bantling. He stood a little
apart, and it was not in the power of the multitude that pressed about
him to make him yield an inch of the ground he had taken--that of
abstracting himself discreetly while the two ladies performed their
embraces.
“There’s Mr. Bantling,” said Isabel, gently, irrelevantly, scarcely
caring much now whether she should find her maid or not.
“Oh yes, he goes everywhere with me. Come here, Mr. Bantling!” Henrietta
exclaimed. Whereupon the gallant bachelor advanced with a smile--a smile
tempered, however, by the gravity of the occasion. “Isn’t it lovely she
has come?” Henrietta asked. “He knows all about it,” she added; “we had
quite a discussion. He said you wouldn’t, I said you would.”
“I thought you always agreed,” Isabel smiled in return. She felt she
could smile now; she had seen in an instant, in Mr. Bantling’s brave
eyes, that he had good news for her. They seemed to say he wished her to
remember he was an old friend of her cousin--that he understood, that
it was all right. Isabel gave him her hand; she thought of him,
extravagantly, as a beautiful blameless knight.
“Oh, I always agree,” said Mr. Bantling. “But she doesn’t, you know.”
“Didn’t I tell you that a maid was a nuisance?” Henrietta enquired.
“Your young lady has probably remained at Calais.”
“I don’t care,” said Isabel, looking at Mr. Bantling, whom she had never
found so interesting.
“Stay with her while I go and see,” Henrietta commanded, leaving the two
for a moment together.
They stood there at first in silence, and then Mr. Bantling asked Isabel
how it had been on the Channel.
“Very fine. No, I believe it was very rough,” she said, to her
companion’s obvious surprise. After which she added: “You’ve been to
Gardencourt, I know.”
“Now how do you know that?”
“I can’t tell you--except that you look like a person who has been to
Gardencourt.”
“Do you think I look awfully sad? It’s awfully sad there, you know.”
“I don’t believe you ever look awfully sad. You look awfully kind,”
 said Isabel with a breadth that cost her no effort. It seemed to her she
should never again feel a superficial embarrassment.
Poor Mr. Bantling, however, was still in this inferior stage. He blushed
a good deal and laughed, he assured her that he was often very blue,
and that when he was blue he was awfully fierce. “You can ask Miss
Stackpole, you know. I was at Gardencourt two days ago.”
“Did you see my cousin?”
“Only for a little. But he had been seeing people; Warburton had been
there the day before. Ralph was just the same as usual, except that he
was in bed and that he looks tremendously ill and that he can’t speak,”
 Mr. Bantling pursued. “He was awfully jolly and funny all the same. He
was just as clever as ever. It’s awfully wretched.”
Even in the crowded, noisy station this simple picture was vivid. “Was
that late in the day?”
“Yes; I went on purpose. We thought you’d like to know.”
“I’m greatly obliged to you. Can I go down to-night?”
“Ah, I don’t think _she’ll_ let you go,” said Mr. Bantling. “She wants you
to stop with her. I made Touchett’s man promise to telegraph me to-day,
and I found the telegram an hour ago at my club. ‘Quiet and easy,’
that’s what it says, and it’s dated two o’clock. So you see you can wait
till to-morrow. You must be awfully tired.”
“Yes, I’m awfully tired. And I thank you again.”
“Oh,” said Mr. Bantling, “We were certain you would like the last news.”
 On which Isabel vaguely noted that he and Henrietta seemed after all to
agree. Miss Stackpole came back with Isabel’s maid, whom she had caught
in the act of proving her utility. This excellent person, instead of
losing herself in the crowd, had simply attended to her mistress’s
luggage, so that the latter was now at liberty to leave the station.
“You know you’re not to think of going to the country to-night,”
 Henrietta remarked to her. “It doesn’t matter whether there’s a train
or not. You’re to come straight to me in Wimpole Street. There isn’t a
corner to be had in London, but I’ve got you one all the same. It isn’t
a Roman palace, but it will do for a night.”
“I’ll do whatever you wish,” Isabel said.
“You’ll come and answer a few questions; that’s what I wish.”
“She doesn’t say anything about dinner, does she, Mrs. Osmond?” Mr.
Bantling enquired jocosely.
Henrietta fixed him a moment with her speculative gaze. “I see you’re
in a great hurry to get your own. You’ll be at the Paddington Station
to-morrow morning at ten.”
“Don’t come for my sake, Mr. Bantling,” said Isabel.
“He’ll come for mine,” Henrietta declared as she ushered her friend into
a cab. And later, in a large dusky parlour in Wimpole Street--to do her
justice there had been dinner enough--she asked those questions to which
she had alluded at the station. “Did your husband make you a scene about
your coming?” That was Miss Stackpole’s first enquiry.
“No; I can’t say he made a scene.”
“He didn’t object then?”
“Yes, he objected very much. But it was not what you’d call a scene.”
“What was it then?”
“It was a very quiet conversation.”
Henrietta for a moment regarded her guest. “It must have been hellish,”
 she then remarked. And Isabel didn’t deny that it had been hellish. But
she confined herself to answering Henrietta’s questions, which was easy,
as they were tolerably definite. For the present she offered her no
new information. “Well,” said Miss Stackpole at last, “I’ve only one
criticism to make. I don’t see why you promised little Miss Osmond to go
back.”
“I’m not sure I myself see now,” Isabel replied. “But I did then.”
“If you’ve forgotten your reason perhaps you won’t return.”
Isabel waited a moment. “Perhaps I shall find another.”
“You’ll certainly never find a good one.”
“In default of a better my having promised will do,” Isabel suggested.
“Yes; that’s why I hate it.”
“Don’t speak of it now. I’ve a little time. Coming away was a
complication, but what will going back be?”
“You must remember, after all, that he won’t make you a scene!” said
Henrietta with much intention.
“He will, though,” Isabel answered gravely. “It won’t be the scene of a
moment; it will be a scene of the rest of my life.”
For some minutes the two women sat and considered this remainder, and
then Miss Stackpole, to change the subject, as Isabel had requested,
announced abruptly: “I’ve been to stay with Lady Pensil!”
“Ah, the invitation came at last!”
“Yes; it took five years. But this time she wanted to see me.”
“Naturally enough.”
“It was more natural than I think you know,” said Henrietta, who fixed
her eyes on a distant point. And then she added, turning suddenly:
“Isabel Archer, I beg your pardon. You don’t know why? Because I
criticised you, and yet I’ve gone further than you. Mr. Osmond, at
least, was born on the other side!”
It was a moment before Isabel grasped her meaning; this sense was so
modestly, or at least so ingeniously, veiled. Isabel’s mind was not
possessed at present with the comicality of things; but she greeted with
a quick laugh the image that her companion had raised. She immediately
recovered herself, however, and with the right excess of intensity,
“Henrietta Stackpole,” she asked, “are you going to give up your
country?”
“Yes, my poor Isabel, I am. I won’t pretend to deny it; I look the fact
in the face. I’m going to marry Mr. Bantling and locate right here in
London.”
“It seems very strange,” said Isabel, smiling now.
“Well yes, I suppose it does. I’ve come to it little by little. I think
I know what I’m doing; but I don’t know as I can explain.”
“One can’t explain one’s marriage,” Isabel answered. “And yours doesn’t
need to be explained. Mr. Bantling isn’t a riddle.”
“No, he isn’t a bad pun--or even a high flight of American humour. He
has a beautiful nature,” Henrietta went on. “I’ve studied him for many
years and I see right through him. He’s as clear as the style of a good
prospectus. He’s not intellectual, but he appreciates intellect. On the
other hand he doesn’t exaggerate its claims. I sometimes think we do in
the United States.”
“Ah,” said Isabel, “you’re changed indeed! It’s the first time I’ve ever
heard you say anything against your native land.”
“I only say that we’re too infatuated with mere brain-power; that, after
all, isn’t a vulgar fault. But I _am_ changed; a woman has to change a
good deal to marry.”
“I hope you’ll be very happy. You will at last--over here--see something
of the inner life.”
Henrietta gave a little significant sigh. “That’s the key to the
mystery, I believe. I couldn’t endure to be kept off. Now I’ve as good
a right as any one!” she added with artless elation. Isabel was duly
diverted, but there was a certain melancholy in her view. Henrietta,
after all, had confessed herself human and feminine, Henrietta whom she
had hitherto regarded as a light keen flame, a disembodied voice. It was
a disappointment to find she had personal susceptibilities, that she was
subject to common passions, and that her intimacy with Mr. Bantling had
not been completely original. There was a want of originality in her
marrying him--there was even a kind of stupidity; and for a moment, to
Isabel’s sense, the dreariness of the world took on a deeper tinge. A
little later indeed she reflected that Mr. Bantling himself at least was
original. But she didn’t see how Henrietta could give up her country.
She herself had relaxed her hold of it, but it had never been her
country as it had been Henrietta’s. She presently asked her if she had
enjoyed her visit to Lady Pensil.
“Oh yes,” said Henrietta, “she didn’t know what to make of me.”
“And was that very enjoyable?”
“Very much so, because she’s supposed to be a master mind. She thinks
she knows everything; but she doesn’t understand a woman of my modern
type. It would be so much easier for her if I were only a little better
or a little worse. She’s so puzzled; I believe she thinks it’s my duty
to go and do something immoral. She thinks it’s immoral that I should
marry her brother; but, after all, that isn’t immoral enough. And she’ll
never understand my mixture--never!”
“She’s not so intelligent as her brother then,” said Isabel. “He appears
to have understood.”
“Oh no, he hasn’t!” cried Miss Stackpole with decision. “I really
believe that’s what he wants to marry me for--just to find out the
mystery and the proportions of it. That’s a fixed idea--a kind of
fascination.”
“It’s very good in you to humour it.”
“Oh well,” said Henrietta, “I’ve something to find out too!” And Isabel
saw that she had not renounced an allegiance, but planned an attack. She
was at last about to grapple in earnest with England.
Isabel also perceived, however, on the morrow, at the Paddington
Station, where she found herself, at ten o’clock, in the company both
of Miss Stackpole and Mr. Bantling, that the gentleman bore his
perplexities lightly. If he had not found out everything he had found
out at least the great point--that Miss Stackpole would not be wanting
in initiative. It was evident that in the selection of a wife he had
been on his guard against this deficiency.
“Henrietta has told me, and I’m very glad,” Isabel said as she gave him
her hand.
“I dare say you think it awfully odd,” Mr. Bantling replied, resting on
his neat umbrella.
“Yes, I think it awfully odd.”
“You can’t think it so awfully odd as I do. But I’ve always rather liked
striking out a line,” said Mr. Bantling serenely.
CHAPTER LIV
Isabel’s arrival at Gardencourt on this second occasion was even
quieter than it had been on the first. Ralph Touchett kept but a small
household, and to the new servants Mrs. Osmond was a stranger; so that
instead of being conducted to her own apartment she was coldly shown
into the drawing-room and left to wait while her name was carried up to
her aunt. She waited a long time; Mrs. Touchett appeared in no hurry to
come to her. She grew impatient at last; she grew nervous and scared--as
scared as if the objects about her had begun to show for conscious
things, watching her trouble with grotesque grimaces. The day was dark
and cold; the dusk was thick in the corners of the wide brown rooms. The
house was perfectly still--with a stillness that Isabel remembered; it
had filled all the place for days before the death of her uncle. She
left the drawing-room and wandered about--strolled into the library and
along the gallery of pictures, where, in the deep silence, her footstep
made an echo. Nothing was changed; she recognised everything she had
seen years before; it might have been only yesterday she had stood
there. She envied the security of valuable “pieces” which change by no
hair’s breadth, only grow in value, while their owners lose inch by
inch youth, happiness, beauty; and she became aware that she was walking
about as her aunt had done on the day she had come to see her in Albany.
She was changed enough since then--that had been the beginning. It
suddenly struck her that if her Aunt Lydia had not come that day in just
that way and found her alone, everything might have been different. She
might have had another life and she might have been a woman more blest.
She stopped in the gallery in front of a small picture--a charming and
precious Bonington--upon which her eyes rested a long time. But she was
not looking at the picture; she was wondering whether if her aunt had
not come that day in Albany she would have married Caspar Goodwood.
Mrs. Touchett appeared at last, just after Isabel had returned to the
big uninhabited drawing-room. She looked a good deal older, but her
eye was as bright as ever and her head as erect; her thin lips seemed a
repository of latent meanings. She wore a little grey dress of the most
undecorated fashion, and Isabel wondered, as she had wondered the first
time, if her remarkable kinswoman resembled more a queen-regent or the
matron of a gaol. Her lips felt very thin indeed on Isabel’s hot cheek.
“I’ve kept you waiting because I’ve been sitting with Ralph,” Mrs.
Touchett said. “The nurse had gone to luncheon and I had taken her
place. He has a man who’s supposed to look after him, but the man’s good
for nothing; he’s always looking out of the window--as if there were
anything to see! I didn’t wish to move, because Ralph seemed to be
sleeping and I was afraid the sound would disturb him. I waited till the
nurse came back. I remembered you knew the house.”
“I find I know it better even than I thought; I’ve been walking
everywhere,” Isabel answered. And then she asked if Ralph slept much.
“He lies with his eyes closed; he doesn’t move. But I’m not sure that
it’s always sleep.”
“Will he see me? Can he speak to me?”
Mrs. Touchett declined the office of saying. “You can try him,” was the
limit of her extravagance. And then she offered to conduct Isabel to her
room. “I thought they had taken you there; but it’s not my house, it’s
Ralph’s; and I don’t know what they do. They must at least have taken
your luggage; I don’t suppose you’ve brought much. Not that I care,
however. I believe they’ve given you the same room you had before; when
Ralph heard you were coming he said you must have that one.”
“Did he say anything else?”
“Ah, my dear, he doesn’t chatter as he used!” cried Mrs. Touchett as she
preceded her niece up the staircase.
It was the same room, and something told Isabel it had not been slept
in since she occupied it. Her luggage was there and was not voluminous;
Mrs. Touchett sat down a moment with her eyes upon it. “Is there really
no hope?” our young woman asked as she stood before her.
“None whatever. There never has been. It has not been a successful
life.”
“No--it has only been a beautiful one.” Isabel found herself already
contradicting her aunt; she was irritated by her dryness.
“I don’t know what you mean by that; there’s no beauty without health.
That is a very odd dress to travel in.”
Isabel glanced at her garment. “I left Rome at an hour’s notice; I took
the first that came.”
“Your sisters, in America, wished to know how you dress. That seemed to
be their principal interest. I wasn’t able to tell them--but they seemed
to have the right idea: that you never wear anything less than black
brocade.”
“They think I’m more brilliant than I am; I’m afraid to tell them the
truth,” said Isabel. “Lily wrote me you had dined with her.”
“She invited me four times, and I went once. After the second time she
should have let me alone. The dinner was very good; it must have been
expensive. Her husband has a very bad manner. Did I enjoy my visit to
America? Why should I have enjoyed it? I didn’t go for my pleasure.”
These were interesting items, but Mrs. Touchett soon left her niece,
whom she was to meet in half an hour at the midday meal. For this
repast the two ladies faced each other at an abbreviated table in the
melancholy dining-room. Here, after a little, Isabel saw her aunt not
to be so dry as she appeared, and her old pity for the poor woman’s
inexpressiveness, her want of regret, of disappointment, came back to
her. Unmistakeably she would have found it a blessing to-day to be able
to feel a defeat, a mistake, even a shame or two. She wondered if she
were not even missing those enrichments of consciousness and privately
trying--reaching out for some aftertaste of life, dregs of the banquet;
the testimony of pain or the cold recreation of remorse. On the other
hand perhaps she was afraid; if she should begin to know remorse at all
it might take her too far. Isabel could perceive, however, how it had
come over her dimly that she had failed of something, that she saw
herself in the future as an old woman without memories. Her little
sharp face looked tragical. She told her niece that Ralph had as yet not
moved, but that he probably would be able to see her before dinner.
And then in a moment she added that he had seen Lord Warburton the day
before; an announcement which startled Isabel a little, as it seemed
an intimation that this personage was in the neighbourhood and that an
accident might bring them together. Such an accident would not be happy;
she had not come to England to struggle again with Lord Warburton. She
none the less presently said to her aunt that he had been very kind to
Ralph; she had seen something of that in Rome.
“He has something else to think of now,” Mrs. Touchett returned. And she
paused with a gaze like a gimlet.
Isabel saw she meant something, and instantly guessed what she meant.
But her reply concealed her guess; her heart beat faster and she wished
to gain a moment. “Ah yes--the House of Lords and all that.”
“He’s not thinking of the Lords; he’s thinking of the ladies. At least
he’s thinking of one of them; he told Ralph he’s engaged to be married.”
“Ah, to be married!” Isabel mildly exclaimed.
“Unless he breaks it off. He seemed to think Ralph would like to know.
Poor Ralph can’t go to the wedding, though I believe it’s to take place
very soon.
“And who’s the young lady?”
“A member of the aristocracy; Lady Flora, Lady Felicia--something of
that sort.”
“I’m very glad,” Isabel said. “It must be a sudden decision.”
“Sudden enough, I believe; a courtship of three weeks. It has only just
been made public.”
“I’m very glad,” Isabel repeated with a larger emphasis. She knew her
aunt was watching her--looking for the signs of some imputed soreness,
and the desire to prevent her companion from seeing anything of this
kind enabled her to speak in the tone of quick satisfaction, the tone
almost of relief. Mrs. Touchett of course followed the tradition that
ladies, even married ones, regard the marriage of their old lovers as
an offence to themselves. Isabel’s first care therefore was to show
that however that might be in general she was not offended now. But
meanwhile, as I say, her heart beat faster; and if she sat for some
moments thoughtful--she presently forgot Mrs. Touchett’s observation--it
was not because she had lost an admirer. Her imagination had traversed
half Europe; it halted, panting, and even trembling a little, in the
city of Rome. She figured herself announcing to her husband that Lord
Warburton was to lead a bride to the altar, and she was of course
not aware how extremely wan she must have looked while she made this
intellectual effort. But at last she collected herself and said to her
aunt: “He was sure to do it some time or other.”
Mrs. Touchett was silent; then she gave a sharp little shake of the
head. “Ah, my dear, you’re beyond me!” she cried suddenly. They went on
with their luncheon in silence; Isabel felt as if she had heard of Lord
Warburton’s death. She had known him only as a suitor, and now that was
all over. He was dead for poor Pansy; by Pansy he might have lived. A
servant had been hovering about; at last Mrs. Touchett requested him
to leave them alone. She had finished her meal; she sat with her
hands folded on the edge of the table. “I should like to ask you three
questions,” she observed when the servant had gone.
“Three are a great many.”
“I can’t do with less; I’ve been thinking. They’re all very good ones.”
“That’s what I’m afraid of. The best questions are the worst,” Isabel
answered. Mrs. Touchett had pushed back her chair, and as her niece left
the table and walked, rather consciously, to one of the deep windows,
she felt herself followed by her eyes.
“Have you ever been sorry you didn’t marry Lord Warburton?” Mrs.
Touchett enquired.
Isabel shook her head slowly, but not heavily. “No, dear aunt.”
“Good. I ought to tell you that I propose to believe what you say.”
“Your believing me’s an immense temptation,” she declared, smiling
still.
“A temptation to lie? I don’t recommend you to do that, for when I’m
misinformed I’m as dangerous as a poisoned rat. I don’t mean to crow
over you.”
“It’s my husband who doesn’t get on with me,” said Isabel.
“I could have told him he wouldn’t. I don’t call that crowing over _you_,”
 Mrs. Touchett added. “Do you still like Serena Merle?” she went on.
“Not as I once did. But it doesn’t matter, for she’s going to America.”
“To America? She must have done something very bad.”
“Yes--very bad.”
“May I ask what it is?”
“She made a convenience of me.”
“Ah,” cried Mrs. Touchett, “so she did of me! She does of every one.”
“She’ll make a convenience of America,” said Isabel, smiling again and
glad that her aunt’s questions were over.
It was not till the evening that she was able to see Ralph. He had been
dozing all day; at least he had been lying unconscious. The doctor was
there, but after a while went away--the local doctor, who had attended
his father and whom Ralph liked. He came three or four times a day; he
was deeply interested in his patient. Ralph had had Sir Matthew Hope,
but he had got tired of this celebrated man, to whom he had asked his
mother to send word he was now dead and was therefore without further
need of medical advice. Mrs. Touchett had simply written to Sir Matthew
that her son disliked him. On the day of Isabel’s arrival Ralph gave no
sign, as I have related, for many hours; but toward evening he raised
himself and said he knew that she had come.
How he knew was not apparent, inasmuch as for fear of exciting him no
one had offered the information. Isabel came in and sat by his bed in
the dim light; there was only a shaded candle in a corner of the room.
She told the nurse she might go--she herself would sit with him for the
rest of the evening. He had opened his eyes and recognised her, and had
moved his hand, which lay helpless beside him, so that she might take
it. But he was unable to speak; he closed his eyes again and remained
perfectly still, only keeping her hand in his own. She sat with him a
long time--till the nurse came back; but he gave no further sign. He
might have passed away while she looked at him; he was already the
figure and pattern of death. She had thought him far gone in Rome,
and this was worse; there was but one change possible now. There was a
strange tranquillity in his face; it was as still as the lid of a box.
With this he was a mere lattice of bones; when he opened his eyes to
greet her it was as if she were looking into immeasurable space. It was
not till midnight that the nurse came back; but the hours, to Isabel,
had not seemed long; it was exactly what she had come for. If she had
come simply to wait she found ample occasion, for he lay three days in
a kind of grateful silence. He recognised her and at moments seemed to
wish to speak; but he found no voice. Then he closed his eyes again, as
if he too were waiting for something--for something that certainly would
come. He was so absolutely quiet that it seemed to her what was coming
had already arrived; and yet she never lost the sense that they were
still together. But they were not always together; there were other
hours that she passed in wandering through the empty house and listening
for a voice that was not poor Ralph’s. She had a constant fear; she
thought it possible her husband would write to her. But he remained
silent, and she only got a letter from Florence and from the Countess
Gemini. Ralph, however, spoke at last--on the evening of the third day.
“I feel better to-night,” he murmured, abruptly, in the soundless
dimness of her vigil; “I think I can say something.” She sank upon her
knees beside his pillow; took his thin hand in her own; begged him
not to make an effort--not to tire himself. His face was of necessity
serious--it was incapable of the muscular play of a smile; but its owner
apparently had not lost a perception of incongruities. “What does it
matter if I’m tired when I’ve all eternity to rest? There’s no harm in
making an effort when it’s the very last of all. Don’t people always
feel better just before the end? I’ve often heard of that; it’s what I
was waiting for. Ever since you’ve been here I thought it would come.
I tried two or three times; I was afraid you’d get tired of sitting
there.” He spoke slowly, with painful breaks and long pauses; his voice
seemed to come from a distance. When he ceased he lay with his face
turned to Isabel and his large unwinking eyes open into her own. “It
was very good of you to come,” he went on. “I thought you would; but I
wasn’t sure.”
“I was not sure either till I came,” said Isabel.
“You’ve been like an angel beside my bed. You know they talk about the
angel of death. It’s the most beautiful of all. You’ve been like that;
as if you were waiting for me.”
“I was not waiting for your death; I was waiting for--for this. This is
not death, dear Ralph.”
“Not for you--no. There’s nothing makes us feel so much alive as to see
others die. That’s the sensation of life--the sense that we remain. I’ve
had it--even I. But now I’m of no use but to give it to others. With me
it’s all over.” And then he paused. Isabel bowed her head further, till
it rested on the two hands that were clasped upon his own. She couldn’t
see him now; but his far-away voice was close to her ear. “Isabel,” he
went on suddenly, “I wish it were over for you.” She answered nothing;
she had burst into sobs; she remained so, with her buried face. He lay
silent, listening to her sobs; at last he gave a long groan. “Ah, what
is it you have done for me?”
“What is it you did for me?” she cried, her now extreme agitation half
smothered by her attitude. She had lost all her shame, all wish to hide
things. Now he must know; she wished him to know, for it brought them
supremely together, and he was beyond the reach of pain. “You did
something once--you know it. O Ralph, you’ve been everything! What have
I done for you--what can I do to-day? I would die if you could live.
But I don’t wish you to live; I would die myself, not to lose you.” Her
voice was as broken as his own and full of tears and anguish.
“You won’t lose me--you’ll keep me. Keep me in your heart; I shall be
nearer to you than I’ve ever been. Dear Isabel, life is better; for in
life there’s love. Death is good--but there’s no love.”
“I never thanked you--I never spoke--I never was what I should be!”
 Isabel went on. She felt a passionate need to cry out and accuse
herself, to let her sorrow possess her. All her troubles, for the
moment, became single and melted together into this present pain. “What
must you have thought of me? Yet how could I know? I never knew, and I
only know to-day because there are people less stupid than I.”
“Don’t mind people,” said Ralph. “I think I’m glad to leave people.”
She raised her head and her clasped hands; she seemed for a moment to
pray to him. “Is it true--is it true?” she asked.
“True that you’ve been stupid? Oh no,” said Ralph with a sensible
intention of wit.
“That you made me rich--that all I have is yours?”
He turned away his head, and for some time said nothing. Then at last:
“Ah, don’t speak of that--that was not happy.” Slowly he moved his face
toward her again, and they once more saw each other. “But for that--but
for that--!” And he paused. “I believe I ruined you,” he wailed.
She was full of the sense that he was beyond the reach of pain; he
seemed already so little of this world. But even if she had not had
it she would still have spoken, for nothing mattered now but the only
knowledge that was not pure anguish--the knowledge that they were
looking at the truth together.
“He married me for the money,” she said. She wished to say everything;
she was afraid he might die before she had done so. He gazed at her a
little, and for the first time his fixed eyes lowered their lids. But he
raised them in a moment, and then, “He was greatly in love with you,” he
answered.
“Yes, he was in love with me. But he wouldn’t have married me if I had
been poor. I don’t hurt you in saying that. How can I? I only want you
to understand. I always tried to keep you from understanding; but that’s
all over.”
“I always understood,” said Ralph.
“I thought you did, and I didn’t like it. But now I like it.”
“You don’t hurt me--you make me very happy.” And as Ralph said this
there was an extraordinary gladness in his voice. She bent her
head again, and pressed her lips to the back of his hand. “I always
understood,” he continued, “though it was so strange--so pitiful. You
wanted to look at life for yourself--but you were not allowed; you
were punished for your wish. You were ground in the very mill of the
conventional!”
“Oh yes, I’ve been punished,” Isabel sobbed.
He listened to her a little, and then continued: “Was he very bad about
your coming?”
“He made it very hard for me. But I don’t care.”
“It is all over then between you?”
“Oh no; I don’t think anything’s over.”
“Are you going back to him?” Ralph gasped.
“I don’t know--I can’t tell. I shall stay here as long as I may. I don’t
want to think--I needn’t think. I don’t care for anything but you, and
that’s enough for the present. It will last a little yet. Here on my
knees, with you dying in my arms, I’m happier than I have been for a
long time. And I want you to be happy--not to think of anything sad;
only to feel that I’m near you and I love you. Why should there be
pain--? In such hours as this what have we to do with pain? That’s not
the deepest thing; there’s something deeper.”
Ralph evidently found from moment to moment greater difficulty in
speaking; he had to wait longer to collect himself. At first he appeared
to make no response to these last words; he let a long time elapse. Then
he murmured simply: “You must stay here.”
“I should like to stay--as long as seems right.”
“As seems right--as seems right?” He repeated her words. “Yes, you think
a great deal about that.”
“Of course one must. You’re very tired,” said Isabel.
“I’m very tired. You said just now that pain’s not the deepest thing.
No--no. But it’s very deep. If I could stay--”
“For me you’ll always be here,” she softly interrupted. It was easy to
interrupt him.
But he went on, after a moment: “It passes, after all; it’s passing now.
But love remains. I don’t know why we should suffer so much. Perhaps I
shall find out. There are many things in life. You’re very young.”
“I feel very old,” said Isabel.
“You’ll grow young again. That’s how I see you. I don’t believe--I don’t
believe--” But he stopped again; his strength failed him.
She begged him to be quiet now. “We needn’t speak to understand each
other,” she said.
“I don’t believe that such a generous mistake as yours can hurt you for
more than a little.”
“Oh Ralph, I’m very happy now,” she cried through her tears.
“And remember this,” he continued, “that if you’ve been hated
you’ve also been loved. Ah but, Isabel--_adored_!” he just audibly and
lingeringly breathed.
“Oh my brother!” she cried with a movement of still deeper prostration.
CHAPTER LV
He had told her, the first evening she ever spent at Gardencourt, that
if she should live to suffer enough she might some day see the ghost
with which the old house was duly provided. She apparently had fulfilled
the necessary condition; for the next morning, in the cold, faint
dawn, she knew that a spirit was standing by her bed. She had lain down
without undressing, it being her belief that Ralph would not outlast
the night. She had no inclination to sleep; she was waiting, and such
waiting was wakeful. But she closed her eyes; she believed that as the
night wore on she should hear a knock at her door. She heard no knock,
but at the time the darkness began vaguely to grow grey she started up
from her pillow as abruptly as if she had received a summons. It seemed
to her for an instant that he was standing there--a vague, hovering
figure in the vagueness of the room. She stared a moment; she saw his
white face--his kind eyes; then she saw there was nothing. She was not
afraid; she was only sure. She quitted the place and in her certainty
passed through dark corridors and down a flight of oaken steps that
shone in the vague light of a hall-window. Outside Ralph’s door she
stopped a moment, listening, but she seemed to hear only the hush that
filled it. She opened the door with a hand as gentle as if she were
lifting a veil from the face of the dead, and saw Mrs. Touchett sitting
motionless and upright beside the couch of her son, with one of his
hands in her own. The doctor was on the other side, with poor Ralph’s
further wrist resting in his professional fingers. The two nurses were
at the foot between them. Mrs. Touchett took no notice of Isabel, but
the doctor looked at her very hard; then he gently placed Ralph’s hand
in a proper position, close beside him. The nurse looked at her very
hard too, and no one said a word; but Isabel only looked at what she had
come to see. It was fairer than Ralph had ever been in life, and there
was a strange resemblance to the face of his father, which, six years
before, she had seen lying on the same pillow. She went to her aunt
and put her arm around her; and Mrs. Touchett, who as a general thing
neither invited nor enjoyed caresses, submitted for a moment to this
one, rising, as might be, to take it. But she was stiff and dry-eyed;
her acute white face was terrible.
“Dear Aunt Lydia,” Isabel murmured.
“Go and thank God you’ve no child,” said Mrs. Touchett, disengaging
herself.
Three days after this a considerable number of people found time, at the
height of the London “season,” to take a morning train down to a quiet
station in Berkshire and spend half an hour in a small grey church which
stood within an easy walk. It was in the green burial-place of this
edifice that Mrs. Touchett consigned her son to earth. She stood herself
at the edge of the grave, and Isabel stood beside her; the sexton
himself had not a more practical interest in the scene than Mrs.
Touchett. It was a solemn occasion, but neither a harsh nor a heavy one;
there was a certain geniality in the appearance of things. The weather
had changed to fair; the day, one of the last of the treacherous
May-time, was warm and windless, and the air had the brightness of the
hawthorn and the blackbird. If it was sad to think of poor Touchett, it
was not too sad, since death, for him, had had no violence. He had been
dying so long; he was so ready; everything had been so expected and
prepared. There were tears in Isabel’s eyes, but they were not tears
that blinded. She looked through them at the beauty of the day, the
splendour of nature, the sweetness of the old English churchyard, the
bowed heads of good friends. Lord Warburton was there, and a group
of gentlemen all unknown to her, several of whom, as she afterwards
learned, were connected with the bank; and there were others whom she
knew. Miss Stackpole was among the first, with honest Mr. Bantling
beside her; and Caspar Goodwood, lifting his head higher than the
rest--bowing it rather less. During much of the time Isabel was
conscious of Mr. Goodwood’s gaze; he looked at her somewhat harder than
he usually looked in public, while the others had fixed their eyes upon
the churchyard turf. But she never let him see that she saw him; she
thought of him only to wonder that he was still in England. She found
she had taken for granted that after accompanying Ralph to Gardencourt
he had gone away; she remembered how little it was a country that
pleased him. He was there, however, very distinctly there; and
something in his attitude seemed to say that he was there with a complex
intention. She wouldn’t meet his eyes, though there was doubtless
sympathy in them; he made her rather uneasy. With the dispersal of the
little group he disappeared, and the only person who came to speak to
her--though several spoke to Mrs. Touchett--was Henrietta Stackpole.
Henrietta had been crying.
Ralph had said to Isabel that he hoped she would remain at Gardencourt,
and she made no immediate motion to leave the place. She said to herself
that it was but common charity to stay a little with her aunt. It was
fortunate she had so good a formula; otherwise she might have been
greatly in want of one. Her errand was over; she had done what she had
left her husband to do. She had a husband in a foreign city, counting
the hours of her absence; in such a case one needed an excellent motive.
He was not one of the best husbands, but that didn’t alter the case.
Certain obligations were involved in the very fact of marriage, and were
quite independent of the quantity of enjoyment extracted from it. Isabel
thought of her husband as little as might be; but now that she was at a
distance, beyond its spell, she thought with a kind of spiritual shudder
of Rome. There was a penetrating chill in the image, and she drew
back into the deepest shade of Gardencourt. She lived from day to day,
postponing, closing her eyes, trying not to think. She knew she must
decide, but she decided nothing; her coming itself had not been a
decision. On that occasion she had simply started. Osmond gave no sound
and now evidently would give none; he would leave it all to her. From
Pansy she heard nothing, but that was very simple: her father had told
her not to write.
Mrs. Touchett accepted Isabel’s company, but offered her no assistance;
she appeared to be absorbed in considering, without enthusiasm but
with perfect lucidity, the new conveniences of her own situation. Mrs.
Touchett was not an optimist, but even from painful occurrences she
managed to extract a certain utility. This consisted in the reflexion
that, after all, such things happened to other people and not to
herself. Death was disagreeable, but in this case it was her son’s
death, not her own; she had never flattered herself that her own would
be disagreeable to any one but Mrs. Touchett. She was better off than
poor Ralph, who had left all the commodities of life behind him,
and indeed all the security; since the worst of dying was, to Mrs.
Touchett’s mind, that it exposed one to be taken advantage of. For
herself she was on the spot; there was nothing so good as that. She
made known to Isabel very punctually--it was the evening her son was
buried--several of Ralph’s testamentary arrangements. He had told her
everything, had consulted her about everything. He left her no money;
of course she had no need of money. He left her the furniture of
Gardencourt, exclusive of the pictures and books and the use of the
place for a year; after which it was to be sold. The money produced by
the sale was to constitute an endowment for a hospital for poor persons
suffering from the malady of which he died; and of this portion of the
will Lord Warburton was appointed executor. The rest of his property,
which was to be withdrawn from the bank, was disposed of in various
bequests, several of them to those cousins in Vermont to whom his
father had already been so bountiful. Then there were a number of small
legacies.
“Some of them are extremely peculiar,” said Mrs. Touchett; “he has left
considerable sums to persons I never heard of. He gave me a list, and I
asked then who some of them were, and he told me they were people who at
various times had seemed to like him. Apparently he thought you didn’t
like him, for he hasn’t left you a penny. It was his opinion that you
had been handsomely treated by his father, which I’m bound to say I
think you were--though I don’t mean that I ever heard him complain of
it. The pictures are to be dispersed; he has distributed them about, one
by one, as little keepsakes. The most valuable of the collection goes to
Lord Warburton. And what do you think he has done with his library?
It sounds like a practical joke. He has left it to your friend Miss
Stackpole--‘in recognition of her services to literature.’ Does he mean
her following him up from Rome? Was that a service to literature? It
contains a great many rare and valuable books, and as she can’t carry
it about the world in her trunk he recommends her to sell it at auction.
She will sell it of course at Christie’s, and with the proceeds she’ll
set up a newspaper. Will that be a service to literature?”
This question Isabel forbore to answer, as it exceeded the little
interrogatory to which she had deemed it necessary to submit on her
arrival. Besides, she had never been less interested in literature than
to-day, as she found when she occasionally took down from the shelf one
of the rare and valuable volumes of which Mrs. Touchett had spoken. She
was quite unable to read; her attention had never been so little at her
command. One afternoon, in the library, about a week after the ceremony
in the churchyard, she was trying to fix it for an hour; but her eyes
often wandered from the book in her hand to the open window, which
looked down the long avenue. It was in this way that she saw a modest
vehicle approach the door and perceived Lord Warburton sitting, in
rather an uncomfortable attitude, in a corner of it. He had always had
a high standard of courtesy, and it was therefore not remarkable, under
the circumstances, that he should have taken the trouble to come down
from London to call on Mrs. Touchett. It was of course Mrs. Touchett
he had come to see, and not Mrs. Osmond; and to prove to herself the
validity of this thesis Isabel presently stepped out of the house and
wandered away into the park. Since her arrival at Gardencourt she
had been but little out of doors, the weather being unfavourable for
visiting the grounds. This evening, however, was fine, and at first it
struck her as a happy thought to have come out. The theory I have just
mentioned was plausible enough, but it brought her little rest, and
if you had seen her pacing about you would have said she had a bad
conscience. She was not pacified when at the end of a quarter of an
hour, finding herself in view of the house, she saw Mrs. Touchett emerge
from the portico accompanied by her visitor. Her aunt had evidently
proposed to Lord Warburton that they should come in search of her. She
was in no humour for visitors and, if she had had a chance, would have
drawn back behind one of the great trees. But she saw she had been seen
and that nothing was left her but to advance. As the lawn at Gardencourt
was a vast expanse this took some time; during which she observed that,
as he walked beside his hostess, Lord Warburton kept his hands rather
stiffly behind him and his eyes upon the ground. Both persons apparently
were silent; but Mrs. Touchett’s thin little glance, as she directed it
toward Isabel, had even at a distance an expression. It seemed to say
with cutting sharpness: “Here’s the eminently amenable nobleman you
might have married!” When Lord Warburton lifted his own eyes, however,
that was not what they said. They only said “This is rather awkward, you
know, and I depend upon you to help me.” He was very grave, very proper
and, for the first time since Isabel had known him, greeted her without
a smile. Even in his days of distress he had always begun with a smile.
He looked extremely selfconscious.
“Lord Warburton has been so good as to come out to see me,” said Mrs.
Touchett. “He tells me he didn’t know you were still here. I know he’s
an old friend of yours, and as I was told you were not in the house I
brought him out to see for himself.”
“Oh, I saw there was a good train at 6.40, that would get me back
in time for dinner,” Mrs. Touchett’s companion rather irrelevantly
explained. “I’m so glad to find you’ve not gone.”
“I’m not here for long, you know,” Isabel said with a certain eagerness.
“I suppose not; but I hope it’s for some weeks. You came to England
sooner than--a--than you thought?”
“Yes, I came very suddenly.”
Mrs. Touchett turned away as if she were looking at the condition of the
grounds, which indeed was not what it should be, while Lord Warburton
hesitated a little. Isabel fancied he had been on the point of asking
about her husband--rather confusedly--and then had checked himself. He
continued immitigably grave, either because he thought it becoming in a
place over which death had just passed, or for more personal reasons. If
he was conscious of personal reasons it was very fortunate that he had
the cover of the former motive; he could make the most of that. Isabel
thought of all this. It was not that his face was sad, for that was
another matter; but it was strangely inexpressive.
“My sisters would have been so glad to come if they had known you were
still here--if they had thought you would see them,” Lord Warburton went
on. “Do kindly let them see you before you leave England.”
“It would give me great pleasure; I have such a friendly recollection of
them.”
“I don’t know whether you would come to Lockleigh for a day or two?
You know there’s always that old promise.” And his lordship coloured a
little as he made this suggestion, which gave his face a somewhat more
familiar air. “Perhaps I’m not right in saying that just now; of course
you’re not thinking of visiting. But I meant what would hardly be a
visit. My sisters are to be at Lockleigh at Whitsuntide for five days;
and if you could come then--as you say you’re not to be very long in
England--I would see that there should be literally no one else.”
Isabel wondered if not even the young lady he was to marry would be
there with her mamma; but she did not express this idea.
“Thank you extremely,” she contented herself with saying; “I’m afraid I
hardly know about Whitsuntide.”
“But I have your promise--haven’t I?--for some other time.”
There was an interrogation in this; but Isabel let it pass. She looked
at her interlocutor a moment, and the result of her observation was
that--as had happened before--she felt sorry for him. “Take care you
don’t miss your train,” she said. And then she added: “I wish you every
happiness.”
He blushed again, more than before, and he looked at his watch. “Ah yes,
6.40; I haven’t much time, but I’ve a fly at the door. Thank you very
much.” It was not apparent whether the thanks applied to her having
reminded him of his train or to the more sentimental remark. “Good-bye,
Mrs. Osmond; good-bye.” He shook hands with her, without meeting her
eyes, and then he turned to Mrs. Touchett, who had wandered back to
them. With her his parting was equally brief; and in a moment the two
ladies saw him move with long steps across the lawn.
“Are you very sure he’s to be married?” Isabel asked of her aunt.
“I can’t be surer than he; but he seems sure. I congratulated him, and
he accepted it.”
“Ah,” said Isabel, “I give it up!”--while her aunt returned to the house
and to those avocations which the visitor had interrupted.
She gave it up, but she still thought of it--thought of it while she
strolled again under the great oaks whose shadows were long upon the
acres of turf. At the end of a few minutes she found herself near a
rustic bench, which, a moment after she had looked at it, struck her as
an object recognised. It was not simply that she had seen it before,
nor even that she had sat upon it; it was that on this spot something
important had happened to her--that the place had an air of association.
Then she remembered that she had been sitting there, six years before,
when a servant brought her from the house the letter in which Caspar
Goodwood informed her that he had followed her to Europe; and that when
she had read the letter she looked up to hear Lord Warburton announcing
that he should like to marry her. It was indeed an historical, an
interesting, bench; she stood and looked at it as if it might have
something to say to her. She wouldn’t sit down on it now--she felt
rather afraid of it. She only stood before it, and while she stood the
past came back to her in one of those rushing waves of emotion by which
persons of sensibility are visited at odd hours. The effect of this
agitation was a sudden sense of being very tired, under the influence
of which she overcame her scruples and sank into the rustic seat. I have
said that she was restless and unable to occupy herself; and whether or
no, if you had seen her there, you would have admired the justice of the
former epithet, you would at least have allowed that at this moment
she was the image of a victim of idleness. Her attitude had a singular
absence of purpose; her hands, hanging at her sides, lost themselves in
the folds of her black dress; her eyes gazed vaguely before her.
There was nothing to recall her to the house; the two ladies, in their
seclusion, dined early and had tea at an indefinite hour. How long she
had sat in this position she could not have told you; but the twilight
had grown thick when she became aware that she was not alone. She
quickly straightened herself, glancing about, and then saw what had
become of her solitude. She was sharing it with Caspar Goodwood,
who stood looking at her, a few yards off, and whose footfall on the
unresonant turf, as he came near, she had not heard. It occurred to her
in the midst of this that it was just so Lord Warburton had surprised
her of old.
She instantly rose, and as soon as Goodwood saw he was seen he started
forward. She had had time only to rise when, with a motion that looked
like violence, but felt like--she knew not what, he grasped her by the
wrist and made her sink again into the seat. She closed her eyes; he had
not hurt her; it was only a touch, which she had obeyed. But there was
something in his face that she wished not to see. That was the way he
had looked at her the other day in the churchyard; only at present
it was worse. He said nothing at first; she only felt him close to
her--beside her on the bench and pressingly turned to her. It almost
seemed to her that no one had ever been so close to her as that.
All this, however, took but an instant, at the end of which she had
disengaged her wrist, turning her eyes upon her visitant. “You’ve
frightened me,” she said.
“I didn’t mean to,” he answered, “but if I did a little, no matter.
I came from London a while ago by the train, but I couldn’t come here
directly. There was a man at the station who got ahead of me. He took
a fly that was there, and I heard him give the order to drive here. I
don’t know who he was, but I didn’t want to come with him; I wanted to
see you alone. So I’ve been waiting and walking about. I’ve walked all
over, and I was just coming to the house when I saw you here. There was
a keeper, or someone, who met me; but that was all right, because I
had made his acquaintance when I came here with your cousin. Is that
gentleman gone? Are you really alone? I want to speak to you.” Goodwood
spoke very fast; he was as excited as when they had parted in Rome.
Isabel had hoped that condition would subside; and she shrank into
herself as she perceived that, on the contrary, he had only let out
sail. She had a new sensation; he had never produced it before; it was
a feeling of danger. There was indeed something really formidable in his
resolution. She gazed straight before her; he, with a hand on each knee,
leaned forward, looking deeply into her face. The twilight seemed
to darken round them. “I want to speak to you,” he repeated; “I’ve
something particular to say. I don’t want to trouble you--as I did
the other day in Rome. That was of no use; it only distressed you. I
couldn’t help it; I knew I was wrong. But I’m not wrong now; please
don’t think I am,” he went on with his hard, deep voice melting a moment
into entreaty. “I came here to-day for a purpose. It’s very different.
It was vain for me to speak to you then; but now I can help you.”
She couldn’t have told you whether it was because she was afraid, or
because such a voice in the darkness seemed of necessity a boon; but she
listened to him as she had never listened before; his words dropped deep
into her soul. They produced a sort of stillness in all her being; and
it was with an effort, in a moment, that she answered him. “How can you
help me?” she asked in a low tone, as if she were taking what he had
said seriously enough to make the enquiry in confidence.
“By inducing you to trust me. Now I know--to-day I know. Do you remember
what I asked you in Rome? Then I was quite in the dark. But to-day I
know on good authority; everything’s clear to me to-day. It was a good
thing when you made me come away with your cousin. He was a good man,
a fine man, one of the best; he told me how the case stands for you. He
explained everything; he guessed my sentiments. He was a member of
your family and he left you--so long as you should be in England--to my
care,” said Goodwood as if he were making a great point. “Do you know
what he said to me the last time I saw him--as he lay there where he
died? He said: ‘Do everything you can for her; do everything she’ll let
you.’”
Isabel suddenly got up. “You had no business to talk about me!”
“Why not--why not, when we talked in that way?” he demanded, following
her fast. “And he was dying--when a man’s dying it’s different.” She
checked the movement she had made to leave him; she was listening more
than ever; it was true that he was not the same as that last time. That
had been aimless, fruitless passion, but at present he had an idea,
which she scented in all her being. “But it doesn’t matter!” he
exclaimed, pressing her still harder, though now without touching a hem
of her garment. “If Touchett had never opened his mouth I should have
known all the same. I had only to look at you at your cousin’s funeral
to see what’s the matter with you. You can’t deceive me any more; for
God’s sake be honest with a man who’s so honest with you. You’re the
most unhappy of women, and your husband’s the deadliest of fiends.”
She turned on him as if he had struck her. “Are you mad?” she cried.
“I’ve never been so sane; I see the whole thing. Don’t think it’s
necessary to defend him. But I won’t say another word against him; I’ll
speak only of you,” Goodwood added quickly. “How can you pretend you’re
not heart-broken? You don’t know what to do--you don’t know where to
turn. It’s too late to play a part; didn’t you leave all that behind you
in Rome? Touchett knew all about it, and I knew it too--what it
would cost you to come here. It will have cost you your life? Say it
will”--and he flared almost into anger: “give me one word of truth! When
I know such a horror as that, how can I keep myself from wishing to save
you? What would you think of me if I should stand still and see you
go back to your reward? ‘It’s awful, what she’ll have to pay for
it!’--that’s what Touchett said to me. I may tell you that, mayn’t I? He
was such a near relation!” cried Goodwood, making his queer grim point
again. “I’d sooner have been shot than let another man say those things
to me; but he was different; he seemed to me to have the right. It was
after he got home--when he saw he was dying, and when I saw it too.
I understand all about it: you’re afraid to go back. You’re perfectly
alone; you don’t know where to turn. You can’t turn anywhere; you know
that perfectly. Now it is therefore that I want you to think of _me_.”
“To think of ‘you’?” Isabel said, standing before him in the dusk. The
idea of which she had caught a glimpse a few moments before now loomed
large. She threw back her head a little; she stared at it as if it had
been a comet in the sky.
“You don’t know where to turn. Turn straight to me. I want to persuade
you to trust me,” Goodwood repeated. And then he paused with his shining
eyes. “Why should you go back--why should you go through that ghastly
form?”
“To get away from you!” she answered. But this expressed only a little
of what she felt. The rest was that she had never been loved before. She
had believed it, but this was different; this was the hot wind of the
desert, at the approach of which the others dropped dead, like mere
sweet airs of the garden. It wrapped her about; it lifted her off her
feet, while the very taste of it, as of something potent, acrid and
strange, forced open her set teeth.
At first, in rejoinder to what she had said, it seemed to her that
he would break out into greater violence. But after an instant he was
perfectly quiet; he wished to prove he was sane, that he had reasoned it
all out. “I want to prevent that, and I think I may, if you’ll only for
once listen to me. It’s too monstrous of you to think of sinking back
into that misery, of going to open your mouth to that poisoned air. It’s
you that are out of your mind. Trust me as if I had the care of you. Why
shouldn’t we be happy--when it’s here before us, when it’s so easy? I’m
yours for ever--for ever and ever. Here I stand; I’m as firm as a rock.
What have you to care about? You’ve no children; that perhaps would be
an obstacle. As it is you’ve nothing to consider. You must save what you
can of your life; you mustn’t lose it all simply because you’ve lost a
part. It would be an insult to you to assume that you care for the look
of the thing, for what people will say, for the bottomless idiocy of the
world. We’ve nothing to do with all that; we’re quite out of it; we look
at things as they are. You took the great step in coming away; the next
is nothing; it’s the natural one. I swear, as I stand here, that a woman
deliberately made to suffer is justified in anything in life--in going
down into the streets if that will help her! I know how you suffer, and
that’s why I’m here. We can do absolutely as we please; to whom under
the sun do we owe anything? What is it that holds us, what is it that
has the smallest right to interfere in such a question as this? Such a
question is between ourselves--and to say that is to settle it! Were we
born to rot in our misery--were we born to be afraid? I never knew _you_
afraid! If you’ll only trust me, how little you will be disappointed!
The world’s all before us--and the world’s very big. I know something
about that.”
Isabel gave a long murmur, like a creature in pain; it was as if he were
pressing something that hurt her.
“The world’s very small,” she said at random; she had an immense
desire to appear to resist. She said it at random, to hear herself say
something; but it was not what she meant. The world, in truth, had never
seemed so large; it seemed to open out, all round her, to take the form
of a mighty sea, where she floated in fathomless waters. She had wanted
help, and here was help; it had come in a rushing torrent. I know not
whether she believed everything he said; but she believed just then
that to let him take her in his arms would be the next best thing to her
dying. This belief, for a moment, was a kind of rapture, in which she
felt herself sink and sink. In the movement she seemed to beat with her
feet, in order to catch herself, to feel something to rest on.
“Ah, be mine as I’m yours!” she heard her companion cry. He had suddenly
given up argument, and his voice seemed to come, harsh and terrible,
through a confusion of vaguer sounds.
This however, of course, was but a subjective fact, as the
metaphysicians say; the confusion, the noise of waters, all the rest
of it, were in her own swimming head. In an instant she became aware of
this. “Do me the greatest kindness of all,” she panted. “I beseech you
to go away!”
“Ah, don’t say that. Don’t kill me!” he cried.
She clasped her hands; her eyes were streaming with tears. “As you love
me, as you pity me, leave me alone!”
He glared at her a moment through the dusk, and the next instant she
felt his arms about her and his lips on her own lips. His kiss was like
white lightning, a flash that spread, and spread again, and stayed; and
it was extraordinarily as if, while she took it, she felt each thing in
his hard manhood that had least pleased her, each aggressive fact of his
face, his figure, his presence, justified of its intense identity and
made one with this act of possession. So had she heard of those wrecked
and under water following a train of images before they sink. But when
darkness returned she was free. She never looked about her; she only
darted from the spot. There were lights in the windows of the house;
they shone far across the lawn. In an extraordinarily short time--for
the distance was considerable--she had moved through the darkness (for
she saw nothing) and reached the door. Here only she paused. She looked
all about her; she listened a little; then she put her hand on the
latch. She had not known where to turn; but she knew now. There was a
very straight path.
Two days afterwards Caspar Goodwood knocked at the door of the house in
Wimpole Street in which Henrietta Stackpole occupied furnished lodgings.
He had hardly removed his hand from the knocker when the door was opened
and Miss Stackpole herself stood before him. She had on her hat and
jacket; she was on the point of going out. “Oh, good-morning,” he said,
“I was in hopes I should find Mrs. Osmond.”
Henrietta kept him waiting a moment for her reply; but there was a good
deal of expression about Miss Stackpole even when she was silent. “Pray
what led you to suppose she was here?”
“I went down to Gardencourt this morning, and the servant told me she
had come to London. He believed she was to come to you.”
Again Miss Stackpole held him--with an intention of perfect kindness--in
suspense. “She came here yesterday, and spent the night. But this
morning she started for Rome.”
Caspar Goodwood was not looking at her; his eyes were fastened on the
doorstep. “Oh, she started--?” he stammered. And without finishing
his phrase or looking up he stiffly averted himself. But he couldn’t
otherwise move.
Henrietta had come out, closing the door behind her, and now she put out
her hand and grasped his arm. “Look here, Mr. Goodwood,” she said; “just
you wait!”
On which he looked up at her--but only to guess, from her face, with a
revulsion, that she simply meant he was young. She stood shining at him
with that cheap comfort, and it added, on the spot, thirty years to his
life. She walked him away with her, however, as if she had given him now
the key to patience.
In this paper, we developed an object detection method of combining top-down modelbased recognition with bottom-up image segmentation. Our method not only detects
object positions but also gives the figure-ground segmentation mask. We designed an
improved Shape Context feature for recognition and proposed a novel FPP procedure
to verify hypotheses. This method can be generalized to many object classes.
Results show that our detection algorithm can achieve both high recall and precision
rates. However there are still some FPs hypotheses that cannot be pruned. They are
typically very similar to objects, like a human-shape rock, or some tree trunks. More
information like color or texture should be explored to prune out these FPs. Another
failure case of SC detector is for very small scale object. These objects have very few
edges points thus are not suitable for SC. Also our method does no work for severe
occlusion where most local information is corrupted
A coffee maker would be almost pointless without its trusty coffeemaker carafe. Without the carafe, the coffee would have nowhere to drip into and there would be no way to serve it to others. Keep reading for a basic description of a carafe.
1. Design
man pouring a cup of coffee
A coffee maker carafe is usually made from glass, but can often be made out of the more durable and insulating stainless steel. The side of the carafe will usually have cup measurements that correlate to the measurements of the water reservoir inside the coffeemaker. The carafe will feature a handle for easy pouring, as well as a removable lid that allows coffee to drip into it while it is being brewed. The lid is specially designed to release the brewed coffee from the filter area above it and direct it into the carafe.
2. Uses
The carafe is both used to catch the coffee as it is being made and to serve the coffee once it is ready. The carafes are designed to be attractive and practical, so you can bring it out to the table and allow guests to serve themselves as they desire.
3. Thermal Carafes
Stainless steel carafes will keep your coffee hotter for a longer period of time. They are also more durable, allowing you to worry less about shattering your carafe.
Each December, surrounded by wonderlands of white paper snowflakes, bright red winterberries, and forests of green conifers reclaiming their ancestral territory from inside the nation’s living rooms and hotel lobbies, children and adults delight to see the true harbinger of the holidays: aluminum metalized polyethylene terephthalate.
Aluminum metalized polyethylene terephthalate settles over store windows like dazzling frost. It flashes like hot, molten gold across the nail plates of young women. It sparkles like pure precision-cut starlight on an ornament of a North American brown bear driving a car towing a camper van. Indeed, in Clement Clarke Moore’s seminal Christmas Eve poem, the eyes of Saint Nicholas himself are said to twinkle like aluminum metalized polyethylene terephthalate (I’m paraphrasing). In homes and malls and schools and synagogues and banks and hospitals and fire stations and hardware stores and breweries and car dealerships, and every kind of office — and outside those places, too — it shines. It glitters. It is glitter.
What is glitter? The simplest answer is one that will leave you slightly unsatisfied, but at least with your confidence in comprehending basic physical properties intact. Glitter is made from glitter. Big glitter begets smaller glitter; smaller glitter gets everywhere, all glitter is impossible to remove; now never ask this question again.
Ah, but if you, like an impertinent child seeking a logistical timetable of Santa Claus’ nocturnal intercontinental journey, demand a more detailed definition — a word of warning: The path to enlightenment is littered with trade secrets, vapors, aluminum ingots, C.I.A. levels of obfuscation, the invisible regions of the visible spectrum, a unit of measurement expressed as “10-6 m” and also New Jersey.
Sign Up for the Wait — Newsletter
Each week, you'll get stories about money, power, sex and scrunchies.
SIGN UP
:･ﾟ✧
Humans, even humans who don’t like glitter, like glitter. We are drawn to shiny things in the same wild way our ancestors were overcome by a compulsion to forage for honey. A theory that has found favor among research psychologists (supported, in part, by a study that monitored babies’ enthusiasm for licking plates with glossy finishes) is that our attraction to sparkle is derived from an innate need to seek out fresh water.
Image
CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
Glitter as a touchable product — or more correctly, an assemblage of touchable products (“glitter” is a mass noun; specifically, it is a granular aggregate, like “rice”) — is an invention so recent it’s barely defined. The Oxford English Dictionary principally concerns itself with explaining glitter as an intangible type of sparkly light. Until the invention in the 20th century of the modern craft substance, one could either observe something’s glitter (the glitter of glass), or hold something that glittered (like, say, ground up glass). Tinsel, which has existed for centuries, does not become glitter when cut into small pieces. It becomes “bits of tinsel.” The tiny, shiny, decorative particles of glitter we are familiar with today are popularly believed to have originated on a farm in New Jersey in the 1930s, when a German immigrant invented a machine to cut scrap material into extremely small pieces. (Curiously, he did not begin filing patents for machines that cut foil into what he called “slivers” until 1961.) The specific events that led to the initial dispersal of glitter are nebulous; in true glitter fashion, all of a sudden, it was simply everywhere.
A December 1942 article in The Times — possibly the first mention in this newspaper of the stuff — advised New York City residents that pitchers of evergreen boughs, placed in their windows for the winter holidays, would offer “additional scintillation” if “sprinkled with dime-store ‘glitter’ or mica.” The pitchers were to replace Christmas candles, which the wartime Army had banned after sunset — along with neon signs in Times Square and the light from the Statue of Liberty’s torch — after determining that the nighttime glow threw offshore Allied vessels into silhouette, transforming them into floating U-boat targets.
Most of the glitter that adorns America’s name brand products is made in one of two places: The first is in New Jersey, but the second, however, is also in New Jersey. The first, the rumored farm site of glitter’s invention, refused to answer any of my questions. “We are a very private company,” a representative said via email. The second is Glitterex.
Editors’ Picks
The Most Instagrammable Neighborhood in America, Before It Was Cool
The Distinctly American Ethos of the Grifter
Demi Moore Lets Her Guard Down
゜・．✧
Image
New Jersey: the Glitter State.
New Jersey: the Glitter State.CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
Image
CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
Glitterex was founded in 1963. Babu Shetty, 69, joined the company as president and C.E.O. in 1999, though he had been working to develop some of its glitter products since the 1970s, when he came to the U.S. from Mumbai to earn an advanced degree. His Ph.D. is in polymer science and engineering. He jokes that he fell into the plastic business because it was recommended to Dustin Hoffman’s character in “The Graduate.”
He also did not want me to visit his glitter factory. The jovial Mr. Shetty told me over the phone that people have no idea of the scientific knowledge required to produce glitter, that Glitterex’s glitter-making technology is some of the most advanced in the world, that people don’t believe how complicated it is, that he would not allow me to see glitter being made, that he would not allow me to hear glitter being made, that I could not even be in the same wing of the building as the room in which glitter was being made under any circumstance, that even Glitterex’s clients are not permitted to see their glitter being made, that he would not reveal the identities of Glitterex’s clients (which include some of the largest multinational corporations in the world; eventually, one did consent to be named: thank you, Revlon, Inc.), and that, fine, I was welcome to come down to Glitterex headquarters to learn more about what I could not learn about in person.
The glitter factory is located in a beige business park, a short walk from the office of a company that makes sidewalks for airports and a nut plant. Inside the Glitterex vestibule, a glass display case burst with glitter-suffused products that I agreed to not describe, even vaguely. Aside from the display, there were scant other hints of the building’s glorious purpose.
Image
The minimum order size Glitterex will accept is 10 pounds, enough to supply sparkle to “half a million bottles” of nail polish by an executive’s estimation.
The minimum order size Glitterex will accept is 10 pounds, enough to supply sparkle to “half a million bottles” of nail polish by an executive’s estimation.CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
That is, until one entered the bottling warehouse itself, which looked like an industrial manufacturing plant colonized by pixies. The concrete floor was finely coated with what appeared to be crushed moonbeams. The forklift winked with shiny crimson flecks. The metal coils of the conveyor belt shone with a rainbow crust. And yet, the space gave the impression of being tidy and well-swept, not unlike a Dust Bowl kitchen if the prairie topsoil had been Technicolor. Near the entrance, metal shelves taller than a man were laden with over one thousand jumbo jars of glitter samples arranged by formulation, color, and size: emerald hearts, pewter diamonds, and what appeared to be samples of the night sky collected from over the Atlantic Ocean. There were neon sparkles so pink you have only seen them in dreams, and rainbow hues that were simultaneously lilac and mint and all the colors of a fire. On one shelf, hundreds of jars of iridescent white fairly glowed. The prettiest shade was slightly violet.
My guides through the glitter kingdom were Lauren Dyer, a Glitterex manager, and Jeet Shetty, who works alongside his father. The biggest seller, they told me, is always silver. They unscrewed several jars so I could compare different silvers side-by-side: sparkly silver and silver that flashed with the power of a thousand suns.
I met the elder Mr. Shetty in a conference room in the front of the office, where, beneath a glittering silhouette-style wall hanging of the pre-9/11 New York City skyline, he breezed through several advanced textbooks’ worth of chemical engineering in an attempt to tell me what glitter was.
“This polyester film” he began, picking up a strip of clear material, about five inches wide, “people might know as mylar. It’s the same polymer as used in a water bottle, so F.D.A.-approved. If you cut this you’d get a clear glitter.” The bulk of Glitterex glitter is made from plastic, though some varieties come from other sources, like aluminum. Clear glitter looks like tiny pieces of a dead jellyfish. “Then,” he said, “we go into the next iteration of a substrate, where the clear film is metalized.” He picked up a shining silver strip of material. “Potato chips bags start with the same polyester film; it’s metalized with aluminum.”
Image
Glitter comes in many shapes and sizes.
Glitter comes in many shapes and sizes.CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
Metalization, he explained, is the process by which aluminum is deposited on both sides of the film. This made sense in theory, but how could aluminum go from being not on the film to being on the film without at least some Scotch tape? “They evaporate aluminum and deposit it on it,” said Mr. Shetty. This made sense in theory, but how could aluminum be evaporated? “It’s a very, very thin layer. They put it in a vacuum chamber, then evaporate the aluminum,” said Mr. Shetty. “With heat,” his son added. “What are they evaporating out of it?” I asked. “Aluminum,” said Mr. Shetty.
I have no idea how humans figured out how to do that, or why it occurred to them to even try, but it sounds expensive.
The primary functions of glitter are, of course, aesthetic; glitter exists so that glitter can be put on things that do not have glitter on them: Popsicle sticks, stuffed animals’ irises; Newt Gingrich. In 2011, the then-presidential candidate was the first prominent target of a “glitter bomb” protest when a 24-year-old activist named Nick Espinosa doused him with rainbow sparkles at a book signing event. It was not Mr. Espinosa’s first time employing mass quantities to make a point; a year prior he had dumped 2,000 pennies in front of a Republican gubernatorial candidate to protest the lowering of Minnesota’s minimum wage. It may also not have been, strictly speaking, a true glitter-bombing — news outlets at the time ran a photo of Mr. Espinosa holding up a bag of shiny party confetti — but the concept stuck.
There are a couple ways to achieve a rainbow effect on individual glitter particles, so useful for politics. Holographic glitter is made by embossing a fine pattern onto film, so that the surface reflects different colors of light in different directions — there is nothing intrinsically rainbow-colored about the glitter itself. Contrast this with more subtle iridescent glitter, which reveals various luminous colors depending on the angle at which it is viewed, and is made from a multilayered clear film, composed of polymers with different refractive indexes.
How many layers is multi?
Image
CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
Image
A single particle of glitter is inspected.
A single particle of glitter is inspected.CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
“Two hundred and thirty three,” said Mr. Shetty, and grinned as he waved an almost invisible sheet of plastic. “It gets very technical,” he warned. “You know, the visible spectrum, and all.”
I nodded, indicating I followed.
“Each layer is half the wavelength of light,” he said.
“WHAT?” I wailed.
・．✩・。
If you want to make something a cool color, it is almost always imperative that the color you select is one that human brains can process. The colors of the visible spectrum, arranged in order from longest to shortest wavelength, are red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. How do we perceive them? Something about cones in our eyeballs. What do the cones detect? Light waves in lengths between about 400 and 700 nanometers. How long is a nanometer? The width of a human hair is the size of about 80,000 to 100,000 of them. What is the perfect thing to say to shatter my fragile sanity? “Each layer is over 230 nanometers,” said Mr. Shetty.
Image
An employee examines defective packaging.
An employee examines defective packaging.CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
Because red has the longest wavelength, the layers of red iridescent film are the thickest; violet iridescent layers are the thinnest. Mr. Shetty began tilting the clear film backward. “That’s the red,” he said, as it flashed red. He continued tilting. “At some point it’ll go to green,” he said, just as the film flashed green, then blue, then violet. He picked up another clear sheet and began to tilt it. This one skipped red and green, starting with a blue flash and then moving to violet, before appearing clear again. “What happens below violet is UV,” he said. “You don’t see it.”
“So an animal would see something there that I can’t see?” I asked.
“If it can see in the ultraviolet range, yes,” he said.
The difference in thickness of the iridescent film strips was imperceptible by touch.
There are other more obvious size differences, of course. Craft glitter is the thickest and least technologically advanced. (To remove it, Mr. Shetty recommends soap and water or fabric softener sheets, to combat the plastic’s static cling.) The finest cosmetic glitter is used in products designed for lips.
It’s impossible to recreate the light-catching effect of glitter without using tiny particles of something, which means that if an object looks glittery upon close inspection (a credit card design; an N.F.L. helmet; a jet ski paint job), there are good odds that it contains glitter. Researchers and zookeepers sometimes mix glitter with animal feed to track animals (polar bears; elephants; domestic cats) via sparkly feces. Plywood manufacturers insert hidden layers of colored glitter in their products to prevent counterfeiting. Because glitter is difficult to remove completely from an area into which it has been introduced, and because individual varieties can be distinguished under a microscope, it can serve as useful crime scene evidence; years ago the F.B.I. contacted Glitterex to catalog samples of its products. The average American, said Mr. Shetty, sees glitter every day. Most of it is hexagonal.
Image
Shrink-wrapped glitter en route to shipment.
Shrink-wrapped glitter en route to shipment.CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
The tiniest glitter Glitterex makes is 50 by 75 microns (a micron is one thousandth of a millimeter). The minimum order size the company will fill is enough to supply sparkle to “half a million bottles” of nail polish by Mr. Shetty’s estimation (10 pounds). Prices vary depending on particle size, the formulations and combinations of polymers involved, but at the upper end — which is to say: the smaller end — a 10-pound plastic bag of glitter costs about $1,000. The company offers over 10,000 varieties.
This was all very forthright, but it did not explain the air of oppressive secrecy that seems to permeate the glitter industry. Did Glitterex worry I would describe its equipment so accurately that readers might construct their own machines to manufacture their own glitter in bulk quantities? Mr. Shetty said that, trade secrets aside, confidentiality is a top-down requirement from clients. Companies do not want others in their industry to know what glitters are in their products, to prevent competitors from making identical formulations.
When I asked Ms. Dyer if she could tell me which industry served as Glitterex’s biggest market, her answer was instant: “No, I absolutely know that I can’t.”
Image
CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
Image
CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
I was taken aback. “But you know what it is?”
“Oh, God, yes,” she said, and laughed. “And you would never guess it. Let’s just leave it at that.” I asked if she could tell me why she couldn’t tell me. “Because they don’t want anyone to know that it’s glitter.”
“If I looked at it, I wouldn’t know it was glitter?”
“No, not really.”
“Would I be able to see the glitter?”
“Oh, you’d be able to see something. But it’s — yeah, I can’t.”
I asked if she would tell me off the record. She would not. I asked if she would tell me off the record after this piece was published. She would not. I told her I couldn’t die without knowing. She guided me to the automotive grade pigments.
.｡*ﾟ
For people who love glitter, there is wonderful news: all the modern plastic glitter that has ever been created is still right here with us. According to Dr. Victoria Miller, a materials science and engineering professor at North Carolina State University, the plastic film from which most glitter is made takes about 1,000 years to completely biodegrade on Earth.
Because each particle is less than five millimeters long, plastic glitter falls under the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s definition of microplastic — a category of material that has lately become a focus of environmental advocacy. (In 2015, for instance, President Obama signed an act banning plastic microbeads from rinse-off cosmetics.) While the research is conclusive that the world’s oceans are a cold stew of man-made microplastics, the effect of their presence is not fully understood. NOAA’s “Ocean Facts” webpage warns that these particles pose “a potential threat to aquatic life,” but states that “not a lot is known about microplastics and their impacts yet.” A more fundamental problem, said Dr. Miller, is that, like all plastics, “glitter is a petroleum product. It comes directly from fossil fuels, and fossil fuels are a very finite resource and we’re using them to make completely disposable things.” (There are natural sources of glittery effects, too, like mica, a substance used in many cosmetics. It is mainly harvested from India, frequently in illegal mines, by children.)
Image
Shine bright like a diamond.
Shine bright like a diamond.CreditChris Maggio for The New York Times
In short, Dr. Miller was adamant that glitter is “not good” for the environment, but she did not advocate a ban. “I think we’ve got bigger fish to fry,” she said.
*:･ﾟ★
So: what is glitter?
A manipulation of humans’ inherent desire for fresh water. An intangible light effect made physical. Mostly plastic, and often from New Jersey. Disposable by design but, it turns out, not literally disposable. A way to make long winter nights slightly brighter, despite the offshore presence of Germans. An object in which the inside of a potato chip bag meets the aurora borealis.
I asked Jeet and Babu to answer the question.
“I would say they’re small decorative particles,” said Jeet. “But that’s not really correct because there are other small decorative particles.”
His father’s answer was simpler: “Since we’re a glitter manufacturer, anything we do is now called ‘glitter.’”
So that’s what it is.
GLAZED MAPLE APPLE CAKE
September 14, 2019 by Amy 1 Comment
This Glazed Maple Apple Cake is a moist and delicious dessert perfect for the fall season, with apples throughout and coated with a maple glaze that tastes like toffee!
Glazed Maple Apple Cake in baking pan
Maple syrup will forever remind me of my Nan.
Paul and I visited her many years ago when she was living in Las Vegas. My Uncle Randy had made pancakes for breakfast and served her a giant stack. He proceeded to pour some maple syrup on top and told her to say “when.” But she never did. She just kept letting him pour and pour until her pancakes were absolutely soaked and her plate was flooded. I leaned over and asked, “Did you not hear him to say stop?” and she said, “Oh, I heard him.” LOL. She was 92 at the time and awesome. Obviously.
Glazed Maple Apple Cake overhead
She’s gone now. But every time I use maple syrup in and on anything, I think of her and laugh.
This Glazed Maple Apple Cake is right up her alley, and no doubt if she was around to try it, she would have several helpings.
slice of Maple Apple Cake
You can use any type of apple, so just pick your favorite. I chose not to peel mine, because it just adds an unnecessary step – the skin breaks down just fine as it bakes. But if you want to peel your apples, go for it!
I also used pecans for the topping, but walnuts would be great, too.
Glazed Maple Apple Cake
I served this Maple Apple Cake for Rosh Hashanah holiday dinner last year and my Dad said it tasted like toffee. It’s so good!
Other Apple Cake recipes we love!
Caramel Apple Sheet Cake
Easy Apple Cake
WATCH THE VIDEO FOR GLAZED MAPLE APPLE CAKE
Print
Glazed Maple Apple Cake
Prep Time
15 mins
Cook Time
25 mins
Total Time
40 mins
 
This Glazed Maple Apple Cake is a moist and delicious dessert perfect for the fall season, with apples throughout and coated with a maple glaze that tastes like toffee!
Course: Dessert
Cuisine: American
Keyword: apple cake, maple apple cake
Servings: 12
Calories: 382 kcal
Ingredients
For the Cake
1 1/3 cups packed brown sugar
1/2 cup unsalted butter , melted and cooled
1/3 cup maple syrup
1 teaspoon vanilla
2 large eggs
2 cups all-purpose flour
3/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon baking soda
2 medium apples , diced very small (2 cups)
For the Maple Glaze
1/4 cup unsalted butter
1/3 cup maple syrup
1/4 cup packed brown sugar
1/4 cup chopped pecans
Directions
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Line a 13x9-inch baking dish with parchment paper, letting the ends extend up the sides.
In a large bowl with an electric mixer, beat the brown sugar, melted butter, syrup, and vanilla until blended.
Add in eggs. Then add in the flour, salt, and baking soda.
Fold in the apples (batter will be thick.)
Transfer batter to the prepared pan.
Bake for 25-30 minutes or until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out almost clean.
Make the glaze: in a small saucepan melt the butter over medium; stir in the syrup and brown sugar. Bring to a boil over medium, stirring constantly until thickened, about 2 minutes. Remove from the heat and stir in the pecans, if using. Pour glaze over the warm cake.
Cool completely in pan. Cut into squares and enjoy!
Recipe Notes
This cake can be wrapped tightly and stored in the refrigerator for up to 5 days.
TUSD investigate unknown chemical substance on bus
Posted: 10:56 AM, Sep 14, 2019 Updated: 1:56 PM, Sep 14, 2019
By: KGUN 9 On Your Side
TUCSON, Ariz. — A bus filled with Mansfeld Magnet Middle School students stopped for reasons Friday while taking those students home.
Tucson Unified School District officials say a group of students were playing with an unknown substance.
TUSD director of communications say "One of the students threw a substance back onto the bus. The bus driver then stopped the bus, contained everyone, and called school safety and asked them to come out and help investigate."
Tucson Police and Tucson Fire were also called to scene. They tell us the call was for something that looked like it could be mercury.
After doing some investigating officials determined the material to be gallium.
It's a non-toxic substance used in chemical labs.
Fire crews on scene of fire at cushion factory
Posted: Thu 10:47 AM, Aug 29, 2019
    
SWANTON, Ohio (WTVG) - Fire crews from multiple towns are on scene of a fire at the Scottdel Cushion Company in Swanton.
According to the fire chief on scene, there were five employees in the building at the time, but all were able to get out safely.
The company manufactures padding for carpeting, a material that is highly flammable. Despite that, crews were able to get the blaze under control in about 10-15 minutes using a proactive approach, fighting it from inside and with ladder crews on the exterior.
Fire crews say the fire was isolated to one part of the building and vented through the roof at one point. Now that the main fire is out, crews remain on scene to put out hot spots.
There is currently no word on what may have sparked the fire or the amount of damage it caused. We will update this with more information as it becomes available.
In 2013, 21 years after Theodor Seuss Geisel — a.k.a. Dr. Seuss — died, his widow was cleaning out a closet when she stumbled upon a box of her husband’s work that she had never seen before. Audrey Geisel immediately called Cathy Goldsmith, who had been the art director and designer for some of Dr. Seuss’ books at Random House. “I’ve found something that might be worth looking at,” Geisel told her.
Mallory Loehr, the senior vice president of Random House Children’s Book Group, flew out to La Jolla, Calif., with Goldsmith to inspect Geisel’s discoveries. “They had spread out the papers on a huge glass dining room table, grouping them in sets,” Loehr recalls. “We were agog with delight and awe.” One of the first things they noticed was a completed draft of “What Pet Should I Get?,” which Random House proceeded to publish in 2015.
Yes, They Found It in a Box
Image<p>One of Andrew Joyner&rsquo;s illustrations from &ldquo;The Horse Museum.&rdquo;</p>
One of Andrew Joyner’s illustrations from “The Horse Museum.”
CreditCreditAndrew Joyner, from Dr. Seuss’s Horse Museum
By Tina Jordan
Sept. 13, 2019
In 2013, 21 years after Theodor Seuss Geisel — a.k.a. Dr. Seuss — died, his widow was cleaning out a closet when she stumbled upon a box of her husband’s work that she had never seen before. Audrey Geisel immediately called Cathy Goldsmith, who had been the art director and designer for some of Dr. Seuss’ books at Random House. “I’ve found something that might be worth looking at,” Geisel told her.
Mallory Loehr, the senior vice president of Random House Children’s Book Group, flew out to La Jolla, Calif., with Goldsmith to inspect Geisel’s discoveries. “They had spread out the papers on a huge glass dining room table, grouping them in sets,” Loehr recalls. “We were agog with delight and awe.” One of the first things they noticed was a completed draft of “What Pet Should I Get?,” which Random House proceeded to publish in 2015.
Get the Book Review Newsletter
Be the first to see reviews, news and features in The New York Times Book Review.
SIGN UP
ImageThis is the original Dr. Seuss sketch for a page in &ldquo;The Horse Museum.&rdquo; Andrew Joyner&rsquo;s interpretation of this sketch is at the top of the story.
This is the original Dr. Seuss sketch for a page in “The Horse Museum.” Andrew Joyner’s interpretation of this sketch is at the top of the story.CreditAndrew Joyner, from “Dr. Seuss’s Horse Museum”
But the other thing that stood out that day was a manuscript in progress called “The Horse Museum,” a children’s book about understanding art. Unlike “What Pet Should I Get?,” it wasn’t publication-ready, so the company brought in Andrew Joyner to create illustrations based on Seuss’ rough sketches. “There’s a strong through-line from Seuss to Joyner,” Loehr says. “It’s Joyner’s work, but you will see Dr. Seuss in it.” “Dr. Seuss’s Horse Museum” enters the list this week at No. 1.
[ Read our review of “Becoming Dr. Seuss: Theodor Geisel and the Making of an American Imagination.” ]
Random House estimates that both manuscripts were written in the mid-1950s, not long before the 1957 publication of “The Cat in the Hat.” “For one thing, the children in ‘What Pet Should I Get?’ are the same children from ‘One Fish, Two Fish,’” explains Dominique Cimina, the executive director of publicity for Random House Children’s Books. “For another, we relate it to a time when Dr. Seuss was working on a TV script with some Cooper Union students about how to explain modern art to people.”
Will Random House publish anything else from the box? Loehr hedges. “There were a lot of things in there,” she says, “but you can’t just pluck them out and publish them; you have to figure out the right way to do it. And if there’s not a right way — then you just don’t.”
This Is The One Critical Piece We’re Missing When It Comes To Learning And Deep Understanding
Robyn D. Shulman
Robyn D. ShulmanContributor 
Entrepreneurs
I write about entrepreneurship, K-12, and higher education.
Teaching the teachers
O'Mahony at Teachers College, NY 2019DR. KIERAN O'MAHONY
How many times have you sat in a classroom and felt like you were listening to Charlie Brown's teacher? Most of us have sat in classes, business or faculty meetings with the thought, "Not again." 
Many classrooms and corporate training sessions still teach according to the obsolete traditional model—where a teacher or trainer is at the front of the room with a whiteboard preaching information that has no meaning whatsoever. 
And, it’s not the teacher’s fault nor the students—as educators, we haven’t been taught any different.
Sound familiar?
You look up at the clock and count the minutes until it's time to go home. You doodle on the perfect white materials, stare at the confectionery bakery items, and begin to make funny faces at your peers.
You want to go home, feel disengaged, and wonder if anyone will notice that you've closed your eyes for a brief second. You are tempted to take out your phone to avoid listening to the voice in the front of the room that never seems to end.
Today In: Small Business
You arrive home with endless packets of paper. From a work meeting, you file those papers away forever or throw them into the garbage can. 
If you have homework, you might push it aside until the last minute because the dread of reading and remembering endless terms is the last thing you want to do.
PROMOTED
Whether you’re leaving school or work, you now have a headache that is draining, you're starving, and your brain feels exhausted and empty. 
And, like most people, you have no desire to go back. 
Effective teaching
Most effective educators know that students learn best when they:
Feel safe
Are empathetic
Let all students share their voices in a safe place
Understand a student’s background knowledge
Can personally relate to the information
Are actively engaged
Feel emotion
Get enough exercise, nutrition and sleep
Are not labeled
What are we missing?
Most teachers and students don’t understand the most critical part of learning: how the brain works, and how we can use it to apply real learning and deep understanding.
Because of this lack of information, when teachers use traditional methods of teaching, learning can feel like a chore.
It’s not your fault as a teacher or trainer
The conventional methodology of teaching is how most teachers and trainers work—and it's not your fault. Today, with the help of neuroscience, we know how to teach and engage learners in the best way possible. 
Whether you're teaching in the classroom or the boardroom, you can turn your learning environment around. 
You can easily create a classroom environment where students can't wait to come to class, engage, grow, and share their world. If you're in the business of corporate training, your company can begin to flourish when employees feel valued, cared for, engaged, and find purpose and meaning in their work.
Stats Talk
In a world where almost everything is changing at a rapid pace, stats show us how our current education system and corporate lifestyle can hold us back from our true growth and potential.
According to Do Something, here are some facts about high school dropout rates:
Every year, over 1.2 million students drop out of high school in the United States alone. That's a student every 26 seconds—or 7,000 a day.
About 25% of high school freshmen fail to graduate from high school on time.
The U.S., which had some of the highest graduation rates of any developed country, now ranks 22nd out of 27 developed countries.
A high school dropout will earn $200,000 less than a high school graduate over his lifetime.
Almost 2,000 high schools across the U.S. graduate less than 60% of their students. These "dropout factories" account for over 50% of the students who leave school every year.
In the U.S., high school dropouts commit about 75% of crimes.
Mental Health Stats
And, mental health statistics are not good either. Here are some facts from The Parent Resource Program, The Jason Foundation:
Suicide is the second leading cause of death for ages 10-24.
Suicide is the second leading cause of death for college-age youth and ages 12-18.
More teenagers and young adults die from suicide than from cancer, heart disease, AIDS, birth defects, stroke, pneumonia, influenza, and chronic lung disease—combined.
Every day, there are an average of over 3,041 attempts by young people in grades 9-12. If these percentages are additionally applied to middle school grades, the numbers would be higher.
Four out of five teens who attempt suicide have given clear warning signs.
Workforce
According to Smarp, productivity, retention, motivation and innovation and workplace well-being all go down when employee engagement is low.
Some of their data shows the following:
Disengaged employees cost companies $450-500 billion each year
85% of employees are not engaged in the workplace
81% of employees could leave their job today
Companies with high-engaged workforce are 21% more profitable
Professionals cite boredom as their main reason to leave their jobs
Only 29% of employees are happy with career advancement opportunities
How do we change these stats?
I had the chance to speak with Dr. Kieran O'Mahony, who is the Founder and Chairman of the Board of Neural Education. He is also the Founding Principal for the Institute for Connecting Neuroscience with Teaching and Learning. 
Before his work at Neural Education, he served as a Research Fellow Course Instructor at the University of Washington.
Neural Education is a nonprofit in Washington that accelerates learning equity so all children can reach their potential. His teaching methodologies, based on years of science, can be applied within school or the workforce—and they work every time.
His organization works primarily with teachers to equip and empower educators to deliver neuro-cognitive methods and practices in classrooms everywhere. Through their science proven techniques, they improve student achievement, increase student self-esteem, and can make teaching less stressful and more enjoyable.
Neural Education translates neuroscience research into practical teaching and learning tools educators can apply within their classrooms.
Understanding how the brain works, what stimulates it, and how to harness these connections in a positive manner enables teachers and students to flourish.
Part of O'Mahony's work, shared on NED Learning focuses on six defining principles:
Neural plasticity makes us who we are
Stress prevents learning
Neurotransmitters are key to learning
All students have the right to reach their learning potential (rather than measuring)
Intelligence is not fixed
A growth mindset is essential
In this interview, which has been edited and condensed, I spoke with O'Mahony about his journey in the education field, how individuals learn best, and the best-kept secret out there regarding the brain—and the gift and love of learning that flourishes when we teach the right way.
Robyn Shulman: Please tell me about yourself and your current work.
Dr. Kieran O'Mahony: Shocked. I'm in the wrong country. I'm way too old. I'm a voice crying in the wind. 
Shulman: Why did you come to the States?
O'Mahony: I came to Seattle for one weekend, which I thought was just enough time to learn how to prevent teen suicides. 
Shulman: What happened when you came here?
O'Mahony: I was under the misguided impression that the solution would be easy to find here in the States. I could bring it back to my world. That world consisted of an inner-city boys high school in Ireland. 
Shulman: What were the solutions you needed?
O'Mahony: Could we create a world where teens would not have to make such horrific choices? I thought I was asking the right question, but in the wrong space. "How can I make schools better?" 
Shulman: What problem did you run into when searching for your answer?
O'Mahony: I was in a framework that I assumed was the true learning framework, but which turned out not to be the case. 
Shulman: Did you find the solution?
O'Mahony: Yes, the good news is that there was and is a solution. The bad news about learning is that we are still entrenched in a model of rewards and punishments—and that is difficult to change. 
Which of us was not rewarded by our parents and teachers, and which of us was not punished by the same people? 
It is difficult to accept a model that (even with more than 40 years solid scientific evidence) steps away from both rewards and punishments. 
It seems unthinkable unless you are a parent whose amazing child is acting up, acting out, or drops out of school.
I shudder to think how much potential we have left on the table over the past decades. Labeling and stratification based on rewards and punishments have brought out stress and trauma toward many children.
37 years later, I am alarmed that the solution was so available and obvious, and that I didn't see it for so long. Millions of other teachers fail to see it every day. 
Shulman: Why did you go into education?
O'Mahony: Education was my obsession from the moment I discovered books. 
Today, I spend more time running an organization and physically teaching classes instead of hiding away in a shady nook with one of the myriads of books. 
For me, like most educators, the incentive is intrinsic. We shy away from extrinsic motivators because they simply do not work. 
Every time we see a child light up with new knowledge and learn a practiced skill, every time a child feels safe, connected, and smiling—teachers smile inwardly knowing they have been part of a significant achievement.
Every time a child is sad, broken, wilted, and outcast, we are in anguish to bring change. 
Teachers know that there is no finer calling, especially when they have every opportunity to influence a human soul so that a child is happy, generative, and can contribute in their full potential.
Shulman: Can you tell me about your previous work at the University of Washington?
O'Mahony: There is a myth about Irish people and luck. For me, if you are Irish, you are lucky enough. However, there is inexplicable serendipity in my timing. I arrived at the University of Washington the same day that John Bransford arrived from Vanderbilt. 
We met, and we both realized that there were significant questions and driving initiatives we could investigate and accomplish with research. How could we advance learning sciences with certain projects?
Shulman: Can you tell me about these projects?
O'Mahony: The first project had to do with the removal of two dams on the Elwha River, a geographic watershed that has been impacted for over 100 years. The project still impacted Native Nation people who had been relocated to reservations as soon as their land became inundated. 
The resilient steel-head salmon came back year after year to try to scale the massive dam walls that blocked their spawning grounds. In 2015, after they removed the dams, they were able to go back to the source on Mount Seattle. Miracles do happen.
Shulman: The second project?
The second project was also a vast engineering airplane project. 
The airplane project was a hefty learning science investigation into unlearning and shift-tasking with engineers in an airplane company that had gambled the barn on a shift from metals to composites. 
Shulman: What did you discover?
O'Mahony: Surprising situations coalesced to excite a cascade of modeling events and methodological constructs that were grounded in both projects. At times, deep in labyrinthine thought in the largest factory in the world, ideas emerged that shed light on learning models.
Imagine my shock when I discovered that I had spent 30 years in education, and yet I knew hardly anything about the one organ that teachers must use every day. 
The sad part was that what I thought I knew about the brain was wrong. I held the same misconceptions and neuro myths that I find most parents and teachers hold today. 
I knew I only used about 10% of my brain, and I was convinced that I had done a lot of damage to my mind because of my party lifestyle when I was in my late teens and early 20s. 
I was blind to the one thing that would have made my life as a teacher easier and more successful.
How could we have missed brain all these years? It is a staggering omission in our learning world. 
In retrospect, it is a mind-boggling quandary. Teachers who most need this organ are asked to change the lives of children who must use this organ. And today, we are still not training teachers in even the most rudimentary structures or functions of the said organ. 
Shulman: You founded The Institute for Connecting Neuroscience with Teaching and Learning. Can you tell me more about it?
O'Mahony: I founded "The Institute for Connecting Neuroscience with Teaching and Learning" when it became apparent to me that the knowledge that emerged in the classroom when I taught education graduates in a seminar of that name (Connecting Neuroscience with Teaching and Learning) was critical for all teachers who would enter the profession. 
Shulman: What did you notice?
O'Mahony: It soon became apparent that teachers who were typically struggling to reconcile their professional training with realities on the front lines were sorely in need of this information and methodologies as well.
The Institute for Connecting Neuroscience with Teaching and Learning (iCNtl) was both an asset and an albatross. 
Shulman: How did people react to the project?
O’Mahony: "It's too long, too academic, or it's too something." These were a few of the responses from teachers and volunteers who were struggling to launch a new program—online as well as face-to-face. 
Shulman: What did you do?
O’Mahony: After arguments and discussions, everyone agreed that Neural Education was a much more appropriate name for reaching teachers and letting people know what we were about right from the get go. 
However, we are doing our business as Neural Education. It makes everything much more palatable with websites, marketing materials, and branding.
Shulman: Can you give me a snapshot of Neural Education for educators who might be interested?
O’Mahony: We connect neuroscience with teaching and learning. We run institutes in professional development for teachers, and workshops for parents. 
Shulman: How about the content?
Teaching with teachers
Heritage University, 2019DR. KIERAN O'MAHONY
O’Mahony: Typically, the 3Rs of the model (Reflect, Revised Thinking, and Report Out) carry the day, thus accomplishing what all great teachers desire—excellent engagement, and personalized learning with deep understanding. 
Kids are happy, mom and pop are ecstatic, the principal is delighted, the superintendent is harmonious, and teachers are stress-free. They know tests will come easy for their kids.
We accomplish what we do without advertising, marketing, or trumpet blare. When a child is performing at peak, and achieving full potential teachers talk. 
Neural Educators teach by understanding how the human brain works and how children learn. 
Shulman: This can change the entire school environment. 
O’Mahony: Yes, instead of usual faculty room negative talk about trouble makers and difficult cases, we are no longer labeling kids as “at-risk” or “high-risk.”
Only by knowing the catchphrase, "Structure before Function," teachers can have incredible success with all children regardless of where they start. 
Many teachers state firmly when first we meet, "If you knew the kind of children I am faced with every day, you would never suggest this approach." 
Shulman: And a little bit later after application?
O’Mahony: A few weeks later they rush back to say: "Why didn't you show me earlier, how could I have missed this?"
Shulman: Do you teach in different capacities?
O’Mahony: We teach face-to-face, blended, and online anywhere in the world. We do not have an office. 
We are virtual. We like to come to your school district and provide structure and support for teachers who are in the business of helping students achieve their full potential. 
We can do that physically, or via the web using a software program called Sococo that is safe for groups of teachers to discuss and make mistakes with like-minded cohorts. 
Teachers will immediately notice that our virtual office is brain-centric and teacher-friendly.
Shulman: Do teachers get credits or CEUs with the program?
O’Mahony: Teachers get CEUs and clock hours (STEM clock hours as well) for attending our professional development institutes.
Shulman: Is there a cost?
O’Mahony: Mostly, we provide these workshops for free for teachers by arranging to have a local business or school district comp them these credits. 
Neural Education has been providing free institutes since 2016 so that teachers can attend and learn the methods and model that is so vital for their success in school. 
Shulman: What’s the typical cost for a teacher to take a course with your organization?
O’Mahony: In 2019, we offered courses for teachers for $99.00. In the future (when funding will allow) teachers will be paid to take this training. It's ridiculous to think of how much money has been squandered on an outdated model that never worked.
Shulman: If you were running the K-12 education system, what would you change today?
O’Mahony: Very simple. Teachers are critical. Adopt a neuro-lens. Stop all labeling and stratification. Switch focus away from content and into circuits and transmitters—neuro.
Teachers don't usually plan lessons with norepinephrine or oxytocin in mind, but if they did, learning would be immediate and forever. Planning in this manner is so easy to accomplish, and results are self-evident. 
Shulman: Can you give me an example?
O’Mahony: When children misbehave, teachers don't automatically think, "Oh, Johnnie's superior longitudinal fasciculus is not fully formed, but I know what to do to help grow that structure." 
Also, I would eliminate all high-stakes testing. Instead, I would use co-created online spaces to highlight childrens' accomplishments and love of learning. Research has shown time and again that as soon as we remove stressors (social and emotional maturational regulation) from learning, all students excel.
Thousands of teachers experience every day the truth about learning—humans are hardwired to learn, and this confirms Neural Education's model and method. Teachers are hard task-masters. If it didn't make sense, or if it wasn't working, Neural Education would be out of business a long time ago.
Neural Education is changing the world every day. When teachers, children, and parents know how the human brain works and how children learn, life gets easy. 
Shulman: What is your main thesis surrounding this topic?
O’Mahony: My thesis is simple: If children can remember 10,000 Pokemon characters, they can learn and understand five essential things about their own brains. 
Every teacher can learn how to grow important neural structures so their students can learn. If parents knew how to build relationships with children, if they knew how critical sleep and exercise and nutrition was for learning, we would have a different world.
Lessons learned for other potential leaders
Shulman: You were able to get your work into public school districts, which is usually a challenging task. Can you tell me how you went about obtaining these critical initiatives into the public education system?
O’Mahony: This question is an easy problem to solve. Teachers are starving for two things: time and a reprieve from stress. 
Shulman: If you were talking with other potential education entrepreneurs who wanted to launch a company or nonprofit, what are the top three lessons you'd share with this audience?
O’Mahony: Motivation is critical. If you are doing it for an external driver like pride, money, prestige or ego, it is easy to lose hope; inevitable to burn out.
Three driving factors that align with how the brain works and how humans find fulfillment are outlined here (adapted from Daniel Pink).
Autonomy: We are hardwired to be self-directed and hard working. So why not go with this? Figure out what to do, be your own boss, and stay true to your inner instincts.
Mastery: We are hardwired to learn. With dedication and focus, it is easy to get good at doing something. Make it count. Don't get caught up in ego stuff; stay true to your autonomy and purpose. 
Purpose: We are hardwired to contribute. Watch any child. Humans find most satisfaction when they can help a fellow, rescue an animal, or give something anonymously. Actions of this ilk fill gaping holes inside that cause people to waste time, effort and money on pleasure seeking through external spheres.
Shulman: Any future events coming up?
O’Mahony: We are booked out one year in advance for these annual events.
Here are a few:
Neuroscience of Learning Institute at NCCE 2020: Seattle Convention Center: A day long summit for teacher Professional Development at the Northwest Council on Computer Education a leader for innovative professional learning.
In 2020 Neural Education is collaborating with two innovative Gates Foundation sponsored programs: Teacher2Teacher and Friends of Children.
Washington Association of Educators of the Talented and Gifted (WAETAG) annual conference October, 2019. Presentation set for 600 members the Neuroscience of Learning.
In 2019, we launched an innovative program for parents called Parent University where PTA groups sponsor Neural Education programs for parents so they can support their children by connecting with what teachers are achieving in the classroom—common vocabulary, mental models, and understanding of brain concepts regarding how children learn.
Caffeine and clean: Why you should fall in love with shower coffee
After you read this, you'll have no need to take a caffeine-free shower any longer
 215
 6
ASHLIE D. STEVENS
SEPTEMBER 14, 2019 9:37PM (UTC)
This is the year I fell in love with shower coffee: the perky, pre-business hours alternative to winding down with a shower beer or a glass of wine in the bathtub. What began as a necessity on occasions when I was running late has evolved into a near-daily jolt of pleasure. 
As with any type of multitasking, there are some logistics that need to be ironed out before you enjoy a sip of shower coffee. Ideally, your shower has a ledge or shelf for safe coffee storage. Travel mugs or a cup with a lid and straw function best, though you may be at peace with getting a splash of water in your drink.
Personally, I like my showers hot and my coffee iced, but there is plenty of room for variety. But while a number of publications have extolled the virtues of the shower beer — last year Thrillist wrote about “The Scientific Reason Why Shower Beers Taste Better” — and compiled lists of ideal brands, there hasn't been much written about what makes an ideal cup of shower coffee. 
This is the case despite the fact that when I began to casually poll fellow writers and friends, I discovered my habit was far more common than I had initially thought.
“If a shower beer is a thing to be relished, a shower coffee should be idolized and worshipped,” one messaged me.
Another responded: “Hold the freaking phone. Shower coffee is a thing? Where has this been all my life?” 
Philadelphia-based food writer Alexandra Jones said she developed a love of shower coffee as her schedule became more demanding. At one point in time, she had to be up at 6:30 a.m., at the gym by 7:30 a.m., returning home at 8:15 a.m. and logging into work by 9 a.m. 
“It seems like a super obvious thing to do now, as I love a good shower beer  — or shower seltzer — after being all hot and sweaty working at the farmers' market or in the garden,” Jones told Salon by email. “When I was really tired, I'd do the coffee first and bring it into the shower with me and turn on a podcast, and it felt like a really nice start to the day.” 
“Now it's my weekday morning ritual when I shower," she continued, "even though I'm not currently going to the gym and just quit the job where I have to be online at certain hours.” 
Deanna Fox, a food and agriculture journalist and cooking school owner based in Albany, N.Y., said “time management and efficiency” got her into shower coffee.
“I work — more than — full time and have kids,” Fox said. “Having a coffee while showering allowed me to kill two birds with one stone. I used to rest the mug of coffee on the back of the toilet and reach out from the shower curtain for sips, but I just remodeled my bathroom and put a shelf in that was deep enough to hold my favorite mug.”
But the practice does not have to be completely utilitarian. I spoke with some coffee professionals about what makes for the best coffee to enjoy mid-shower on a flavor-level.
Ever Meister has been in the industry for almost two decades. The author of "New York City Coffee: A Caffeinated History," Meister is currently the editorial manager and director of education for the specialty-coffee importing company Cafe Imports.
When it comes to a shower coffee, she tends to save the more adventurous flavors for later in the afternoon and go with a more mellow profile.
“I'll almost always go for a just-bright-enough Colombian coffee or a Peru that has mellow sweetness and some apricot or melon notes,” Meister said. “In layman's terms: A nice mild South American fits the bill for me, but if you need something punchier, a dark-roasted Sumatran or Kenyan coffee will open your eyes right up.” 
Of course, one of the hazards of enjoying a cup in the shower is that it may get accidentally diluted with some water. Ashley Rodriguez, the former online editor for Barista Magazine and host of the podcast “Boss Barista,” plans for that. 
“So perhaps not a light Ethiopian coffee, since the flavors of that are delicate and floral,” Rodriguez said. “I'd pick a coffee from Central or South America, maybe a nice round Colombian coffee or something from Brazil. They'll still taste great with a few wayward splashes of water from the shower.” 
I have a couple personal picks in rotation that fit Meister and Rodriguez’s recommendations. Louisville-based Heine Brothers’ Coffee’s Dog Day Cold Brew is made from a blend of Nicaraguan, Sumatran and Ethiopian ground coffees , which have been steeped in cold water for about 16 hours. Since there’s no heat in the brewing process, the result is less bitter, and the smooth, chocolatey notes really shine through. 
Atlanta’s Batdorf & Bronson’s Organic Whirling Dervish Blend has a light acidity, making it ideal for morning. And its super velvety body can handle an extra splash of water or two. If I’m truly in a time-crunch, ReAnimator’s Keystone Blend is instant coffee that actually tastes really good. 
So order up one of these blends, check out your local roastery or if coffee is a “volume substance” that you need to buy cheap and in bulk like Fox, Folgers is just fine, too. Regardless, there is no need for you to take a caffeine-free shower any longer. 
Tons of dirt to be piled high in Perimeter Center; to be used to fill pond
Posted by Dyana Bagby | Sep 14, 2019
A mountain of dirt expected to stand about 30 feet tall could soon be visible to travelers along Ashford-Dunwoody Road in bustling Perimeter Center.
Tons of dirt stacked up to 30 feet high will be stockpiled in the parking lot and where the restaurants Brio Tuscan Grill and McCormick & Schmic’s Seafood Restaurant, located below P.F. Chang’s in this Google Earth image, once operated. The dirt is needed to fill the pond on the site for a new mixed-use development.
The dirt will be used to fill the detention pond that fronts the busy thoroughfare between between Ashford Parkway and Meadow Lane Road in Dunwoody, a short distance from Perimeter Mall. Branch Properties recently got the city’s approval to build the Perimeter Marketplace mixed-use project that include a grocery store, restaurant and retail space, a RaceTrac and a bank. The project requires filling the pond to build a surface parking lot.
The developers are getting the dirt from the Georgia Department of Transportation’s Transform 285/400 project and plan to stockpile it, according to Community Development Director Richard McLeod. There are no city rules that prohibit the developer from doing so, he said.
In a Sept. 12 email to the mayor and City Council, McLeod said Branch Properties is expected to soon break ground on the project with plans to tear down the former McCormick & Schmick’s Seafood Restaurant and Brio Tuscan Grille restaurant buildings. P.F. Chang’s is expected to remain open until May 1 and then it will also be torn down, he said.
The tons of dirt needed to fill the pond will be stacked about 30 feet high in the parking lot and where the restaurants now stand, he explained.
McLeod said the dirt will be transported to the site on Ashford-Dunwoody Road. The first batch of dirt is expected to be bout 118,000 cubic yards, which is just half of what is needed to fill the pond, he said. Another round of 100,000 cubic yards of dirt will follow.
McLeod said he did not know the timeline for when the demolition would happen, when the stockpiling of dirt would begin or how long the dirt would remain.
Data Is the New Copper
Data breaches fuel a complex cybercriminal ecosystem, similar to copper thefts after the financial crisis.
If you feel as if there's a new data breach in the news every day, it's not just you. Breaches  announced recently at Capital One, MoviePass, StockX, and others have exposed a variety of personal data across more than 100 million consumers. This has spurred lawsuits and generated thousands of headlines.
Other companies compromised this year include Citrix, which lost 6TB of sensitive data, First American Financial, (885 million records exposed), and Facebook (540 million records exposed). The attack vector or leaked data might vary, but these breaches all have one thing in common: the information exposed provides raw materials that fuel a complex cybercriminal ecosystem, and these headlines are just the tip of the iceberg.
Most victims don't know how cybercriminals use their stolen data. One way to understand this is to consider the epidemic of copper theft that hit the country following the mortgage crisis. As buildings were left abandoned, thieves stole copper wiring and piping. The copper could then be sold for $3 a pound to buyers willing to not ask questions about where it came from. It's a similar story with data, where the breach itself is rarely the end goal of cybercriminals but simply provides a means to obtain money through a multistage scheme. And unlike copper, the same data can be stolen, sold, and used, many times.
Copper thieves use crowbars and wrenches. Cybercriminals use programs that exploit software vulnerabilities and automatically test millions of passwords to opportunistically take over online accounts. Copper thieves find industrial middlemen to sell their wares, while cybercriminals find underground marketplaces to connect to other criminals who specialize in using stolen data in different ways. Addresses and birth dates are used in identity fraud, such as applying for loans. Stolen credit cards can be used to make fraudulent purchases, and stolen passwords are keys providing entry to other accounts, that when compromised, enable criminals to empty bank accounts or turn gift cards into cash.
Cutting Off the Supply
Curbing the trade of stolen copper is easier than cutting off the supply of stolen data. With copper, law enforcement goes after the resellers, fining them when stolen materials are found in their possession. For data, the mitigation options vary considerably depending on the type of information that is exposed.
With stolen credit cards, the damage can actually be somewhat contained. Increased EMV (chip-based) adoption and improved fraud-detection helps limit the impact of any given breach of credit card data.
Personal data being in the wrong hands is harder to mitigate. You can't change your birth date. Your physical address is often publicly available information, accessible to cybercriminals with no data breach required. The fact that these data types, as well as "security questions" like mother's maiden name, are still commonly relied on for authentication purposes reveals a systemic problem that must be addressed.
Credential theft (e.g., stolen email addresses and passwords) is the most pernicious and least understood type of breach. Most people have lost track of all of the different places where they have reused passwords. You can't blame them: The average user has more than 100 accounts with various websites, apps, and services that they have created over time. This means that cybercriminals using automated fraud tools in credential stuffing attacks have a reliable rate of success when they try passwords from one site against another, often around 2%. With only 1 million stolen passwords from any one website, a criminal can quickly take over tens of thousands of accounts on a completely unrelated website and repeat this on other sites to ultimately breach more accounts than the original breach.
Protecting the Data
Governments are trying to address these problems. The EU's General Data Protection Regulation prohibits some insecure data storage practices. The California Consumer Privacy Act grants consumers more control and insight into how their personal information is used online. The Digital Identity Guidelines from the US National Institute of Standards and Technology recommends that companies check passwords against lists of known stolen passwords. The US Federal Trade Commission settled its complaint against a company last year for having inadequate protection against credential stuffing, which led to compromised customer accounts. These efforts will all help over time.
The complexity of our online lives poses many challenges, and the global situation may get worse before it gets better. As long as there's a market for copper or data, there will be criminals trying to steal them. But by improving corporate security standards, defending against the use of exposed information, and adopting better security practices, we can make it much harder for cybercriminals to turn stolen data into gold.
I Don’t Want Dead Aunt Mildred’s Pet Parakeet
But she bequeathed it to my daughter.
Dear Care and Feeding,
My Aunt Mildred has just passed. She was in her late 80s, it was in her sleep, we’re all at peace about it.
Here’s the problem: In her will, she left my 14-year-old daughter her horrible bird. I am biased, because I grew up in New York and see all birds as rats with wings, but I never imagined one would wind up living and pooping in my house.
It’s a monk parakeet, which the internet tells me can live from 15 to 20 years (“Hawk” is, as far as we can tell, about 5 years old.) I don’t want it in my house, and I really don’t want to inherit it when my daughter leaves for college. What do I do?
—Shudder
Dear Shudder,
As someone else who would never allow a bird to live in her home, I understand your aversion. Nor am I overly hung up on Aunt Mildred’s wishes here, as she is dead. She shouldn’t have bought a bird that lives for 20 years in her 80s if she wanted to control all possible outcomes.
Does your daughter want the bird? If—after she has been brought up to speed on the amount of care she will have to provide the bird, minus any parental assistance, financial or otherwise—she still wants the bird, then I think you have a bird now. I’m very sorry.
If your daughter does not want the bird or the responsibilities that come with it, take it to a bird sanctuary, where it can live with many, many other exotic birds that old people have willed to their squeamish children and grandchildren. Don’t sell it to a pet store.
Please keep me posted. Please do not send me the bird. I do not want it.
Americans are not using umbrellas as they were intended
Many of us apply sunscreen when we go to the beach. But walking outside under the fierce summer sun—even if it’s to run a quick errand—can be taxing: We sweat, we get exhausted, we burn, and we expose ourselves to dangerous UV rays.
In Asian countries, many people have a convenient tool at their disposal: They’ll often use umbrellas to shield them from the sun’s powerful rays.
In the US, even though most people own an umbrella to keep them dry when it’s raining, almost no one uses one for sun protection. Yet at one time, trendsetting American women did use umbrellas for sun protection.
As a historian of technology, I’m interested in why some technologies are readily accepted by some groups but not by others. Unlike an expensive technology that may be very challenging to learn how to use—such as a car with a manual transmission—the umbrella is cheap, readily accessible and easy to use.
So why did the sun umbrella fall out of favor in the US? And can —women and men—ever be convinced to carry an umbrella when it’s hot and sunny, not just when it’s wet?
From status symbol to tool of the masses
The umbrella was actually invented to protect people from the sun.
The origin of the word “parasol” comes from the French “para,” for “stop,” and “sol,” for sun. And “umbrella” originates from the Latin “umbra,” which means “shade” or “shadow.”
Thousands of years ago, servants in Mesopotamia, Egypt, China, and India wielded large umbrellas to shade rulers from the sun. Umbrellas made for individual use didn’t appear in Europe until the late 17th and early 18th centuries, and they were deployed to ward off both the sun and the rain. Fashionable, wealthy women primarily used them, a reflection of the umbrella’s high cost and the status it denoted.
By the 1850s, the introduction of folding metal ribs and lighter materials, like silk, reduced the weight and cost of the umbrella, transforming it into an essential component of the wardrobes of middle-class and upper-class women.
Like other technologies, ranging from radios to thermos bottles, 20th-century mass production turned umbrellas from a status symbol for the wealthy into a tool for the masses.
When it comes to protection from the sun, umbrellas have been long used by women far more than men. In 19th-century Western cultures—much like in Asia today—pale skin was perceived as a sign of beauty. It signaled that a woman was wealthy enough that she didn’t have to work outdoors.
The umbrella also came to be associated with feminine frailty, which made umbrellas less attractive to men. The reluctance of the military to authorize their officers and men to use umbrellas is one example of how the umbrella has been gendered.
Yet since the 1960s, the inexpensive umbrella has become a widespread low-cost accessory for Asian women to protect them from the sun. A 2008 survey found 65% of Beijing women used an umbrella to reduce sun exposure, while only 14% of men did—a result found in similar studies.
So why did American women stop using the umbrella for sun protection?
The automobile reduced the need for walking and provided a private shield from the sun for the driver and passengers. Starting in the 1920s, tans started to be seen as a sign of beauty in many Western cultures, while changing fashion styles dictated that a “modern” women should shed the parasol as a must-have accessory.
A sensible skin cancer deterrent?
While many Asian women might use the umbrella to preserve their fair skin, increasing concerns about skin cancer might serve as an impetus to re-introduce the sun umbrella in Western cultures.
A rise in skin cancer rates—5 million new cases and 9,000 deaths from melanoma annually in America—has led to a growing emphasis on reducing sun exposure among public health advocates.
Nonetheless, sun umbrellas haven’t received much attention. Even the American Academy of Dermatology suggests umbrellas only for infants, gardeners, and tractor drivers.
Yet they’re effective, cheaper, and less messy than applying sunscreen. A 2012 study conducted by the Emory Medical School Department of Dermatology found that an umbrella could reduce direct exposure to UV rays by 77% to 99%. Total UV exposure, which includes indirect sunlight reflected from the ground, can be much higher, which is why sun umbrella advocates emphasize that it should be used only as an adjunct, not a replacement, for other preventive measures like clothing and sunscreen.
But clearly, there’s a big roadblock that’s holding back their widespread adoption—American women either don’t know about sun umbrellas or don’t see them as fashionable. And most men definitely don’t view them favorably.
Making umbrellas fashionable again
How can we make umbrellas fashionable again?
McDonald’s, of all places, could offer some clues.
Eating hamburgers with your hands is not a genetically hardwired activity. Some cultures even frown on eating with your hands in public.
Nonetheless, since the 1960s, McDonald’s has opened over 30,000 stores in more than 100 countries. Now, people around the world eat hamburgers with their hands. McDonald’s pulled this off by intensively promoting its burgers as a visible symbol of modernity and Americanism while also adapting to local cultures.
Menus were expanded to include local cuisine—think shrimpburgers in Japan and mashed potato beef burgers in China. McDonald’s advertisements featured celebrities and actors happily eating hamburgers with their hands. Nervous neophytes easily learned how to hold a hamburger without feeling like an ignorant, second-class citizen.
Making sun umbrellas fashionable might require a similar campaign, one that involves the medical community, fashion designers, umbrella manufacturers, umbrellas sellers, and media influencers.
Just as the MTV show Sixteen and Pregnant helped reduce teenage pregnancy in the United States, so too could television and social media promote celebrities and influencers using sun umbrellas.
This is not wishful thinking. In a one survey of women conducted from 2011 to 2012, 80% of nonusers indicated that a doctor’s recommendation would make them consider using a sun umbrella. Seventy-one percent thought seeing more people using a sun umbrella would encourage them to actually use one. In the study, participants who viewed photographs of famous women using umbrellas for sun protection thought that they were more socially acceptable.
The women surveyed were young: 31 was the mean age. Their main reasons for using a sun umbrella were to avoid wrinkles, protect their skin and, last, minimize the risk of skin cancer. The main reasons for not using a sun umbrella were the understandable desire to keep their hands free, the inconvenience of using one, and, significantly, not having thought about it before.
As for me, a 63-year-old male living in sunny Texas whose parents had skin cancer, I’ll keep embarrassing my kids by wearing my wide-brimmed dorky dad hat, slathering on the sun screen, donning long-sleeve shirts—and unfurling my portable umbrella when strolling under the sun.
To Reduce Suicides, Block Access to the Methods
Suicide rate in U.S. is rising, but experts propose powerful deterrent
Suicide rate in the U.S.
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
In the U.S., the rate of suicide has steadily increased for more than a decade.
The reasons for that are uncertain, but one thing is clear: The urge to take your own life is fleeting.
According to researchers at Harvard University, nine out of 10 people who attempt suicide and survive won’t go on to die by suicide at a later date. Because of that, blocking access to methods of suicide—such as bridges or firearms—can be a powerful deterrent.
In 2017, the most recent year available, 47,173 people died from suicide, up from 29,350 in 2000, according to the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
It is the 10th leading cause of death, according to the CDC, and the focus of efforts to reduce the rate by 20% over the next five years.
“Almost every demographic group is moving in the wrong direction,” said Christine Moutier, chief medical officer of the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, which recognizes National Suicide Prevention Week through Saturday. “We probably won’t be able to prevent every suicide, although that is our aspirational goal, but we can do a lot better.”
There is no single motivation for suicide, according to experts, but risk factors include mental-health issues, physical-health problems and early trauma, such as abuse, neglect or head injury.
“There are a multitude of factors,” said Jill Harkavy-Friedman, vice president of research at the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention. “We don’t fully understand how someone transitions from being at risk to acting on it.”
Still, certain trends are apparent.
Those who are at greatest risk are white males and, in particular, middle-age white men.
In 2017, white males accounted for nearly 70% of all suicides, according to data collected by the CDC. White women, the next largest group, accounted for 19.4%. Men of color represented 8.3%, and women of color represented 2.6%.
The rate of suicide for the oldest white men was higher than for middle-age white men, but in raw numbers, more middle-aged men died. In 2017, 8,927 white men ages 45 to 59 killed themselves, a rate of around 35 per 100,000 men in that group, while 3,322 men age 75 and older died by suicide, a rate of around 44 per 100,000.
Firearms are the most common method of suicide used by men.
In 2017, 56% of male suicides killed themselves with a firearm, while among women, poison, firearms and suffocation accounted for 90% of suicides in nearly equal measure, according to the CDC data.
Whether someone acts on the urge to commit suicide may hinge on having access to a preferred method in a moment of crisis. In one study, the Israel Defense Forces found that restricting access to weapons, among other interventions, reduced the soldiers’ suicide rate by 57%.
Because of the percentage of suicides involving firearms (more suicides than homicides involve guns), the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention and the National Shooting Sports Foundation are working together to encourage the safe storage of firearms.
A suicide prevention sign posted along a railway line. 
“People don’t make that connection,” Dr. Harkavy-Friedman said. “They have a firearm for hunting or sport. They don’t understand that if you have a person in the home who is struggling—and it’s not necessarily a family member—if a gun isn’t locked and unloaded, somebody may use it.”
The simple act of blocking access to a suicide method is believed to be effective because of the way the brain functions.
“In a moment of crisis, the brain changes,” said Alexis O’Brien, a spokeswoman for the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention. “It becomes more rigid. You don’t think as fluidly as you would in other circumstances.”
SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
How have you, or your family, dealt with suicide? Share your advice below.
In the case of suicide, individuals tend to become fixated on a method, she said, and if something comes between them and the means they have settled on, they often don’t choose an alternative.
“That’s why bridge barriers are so successful,” Ms. O’Brien said. “They don’t drive down the road to the next bridge. They just don’t die.”
If you are thinking about suicide or worried about a friend or loved one, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline can be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week, at 1-800-273-8255.
Rare Maori cloak pulled from auction after online threats and abuse
By Lianne Kolirin, CNN
Updated 9:49 AM ET, Fri September 13, 2019
An auction house in Sussex that has been forced to withdraw a Maori shawl that it had listed for sale after receiving abuse and threats about it online
An auction house in Sussex that has been forced to withdraw a Maori shawl that it had listed for sale after receiving abuse and threats about it online
London (CNN)A small British auction house has withdrawn from sale a rare Maori cloak which apparently once belonged to a tribal chief, after receiving online intimidation and insults.
Burstow & Hewett, in the Sussex town of Battle, were subject to "the worst kind of threats," which they eventually reported to the police, according to managing partner Mark Ellin.
The firm and their clients who own the cloak -- traditionally referred to as a kakahu -- were subjected to a "barrage" of angry responses after a piece about the historic artifact aired on New Zealand TV last month.
Air New Zealand threatened with Māori boycott over attempt to trademark &#39;Kia Ora&#39; logo
Air New Zealand threatened with Māori boycott over attempt to trademark 'Kia Ora' logo
Steve and Mary Squires discovered the garment -- made from hand-woven flax and cotton with a dyed geometric border -- at the back of a cupboard last year, where it had stayed folded for "at least 100 years," according to Mary. As such, its bright colors are almost as good as new.
What made it even more special was an attached handwritten note, which read: "Maori mat worn by the Chief Rewi when peace was declared between Maoris and Europeans after the Battle of Orakau," according to a press release from Burstow & Hewett.
The couple described how they researched the family history and stumbled across a Thomas Grice, who was recorded as spending time with Chief Rewi in the years after the Maori wars, between 1845 and 1872.
Meanwhile, photographs of the chief from around 1879 depict him wearing a very similar cloak, according to the release. Amazed by the story, the auctioneers welcomed the TV crew to their premises.
The handwritten note that was attached to the shawl.
In the TV clip, the couple expressed a desire to see the cloak return to New Zealand. "We would love it to go back to New Zealand, but not necessarily as a gift," said Steve.
This was not unreasonable, Ellin told CNN: "They traced their family back and found that one of their ancestors traveled around with the chief -- they are the rightful owners. It has been in their family since it was given to them by the chief -- there's no question that it was ever stolen."
What seemed like a good opportunity for some publicity completely backfired, according to Ellin.
The shawl had remained in a cupboard for more than 100 years, so its colours remain undimmed.
The shawl had remained in a cupboard for more than 100 years, so its colours remain undimmed.
"We were bombarded as soon as it was on TV. We were absolutely barraged with emails and Facebook abuse and trolling... Threats against us and the couple, saying 'we know where they live' and threatening to burn our business down."
One piece of correspondence even referenced the Mongrel Mob, a notorious criminal gang in New Zealand. Ellin described the messages as "the sort of thing you would be frightened to read if it was about you."
Sussex Police said in a statement to CNN: "A report of this incident has been recorded and the circumstances have been assessed. Safety advice has been given to the recipient."
New Zealand firefighters perform powerful haka to honor 9/11 first responders
New Zealand firefighters perform powerful haka to honor 9/11 first responders
The cloak garnered much attention from interested parties, including Maori cultural groups and museums in New Zealand. But at the end of August, Ellin and his colleagues canceled the auction, which had been scheduled for September 18.
"That (the abuse) was enough for us to say we don't want anything to do with this so we immediately made a decision to withdraw it," he said.
The owners have since deposited the cloak with an undisclosed bank until they decide what to do next, according to Ellin.
"It has been a learning experience and I hope never to repeat it again," he said.
There’s nothing wrong with snail mail. 
Opening up your mailbox to find a hand-written note is one of the best feelings. People used to have a book of stamps on hand for sending things like checks, bills, and thank-you letters, but now with email, there’s less need for stocking up on stamps. 
Stamps are required to send anything via postal services. A book of stamps is what people commonly buy because it has 20 stamps and makes for less frequent trips to purchase more. 
Price of a book of stamps
The cost of a book of stamps (20 stamps) is $9.80, while the cost of a single stamp is $0.55.
The price of stamps changes year-over-year, so if you’re asking someone who’s older they’ll tell you the price of stamps is outrageous, while younger generations only know the most recent prices and other things like how to sell on Amazon. 
How much is a book of stamps
On January 27, 2019, the U.S. Postal Service implemented new postage rates. Previously, a book of stamps cost $9.20. After January 27th, it cost $9.80. The First Class Mail Letter (1 oz.) postage rate is $0.55. In other words, a single stamp is 55 cents, five cents more than it was in 2019. The last time the USPS increased rates this much was more than a decade ago. 